



The Mahabharata

of

Krishna-Dwaipayana Vyasa

BOOK 13

ANUSASANA PARVA

Translated into English Prose from the Original Sanskrit Text

by

Kisari Mohan Ganguli

[1883-1896]

Scanned at sacred-texts.com, 2005. Proofed by John Bruno Hare, January
2005.



THE MAHABHARATA

ANUSASANA PARVA

PART I

SECTION I

(Anusasanika Parva)

OM! HAVING BOWED down unto Narayana, and Nara the foremost of male
beings, and unto the goddess Saraswati, must the word Jaya be uttered.

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, tranquillity of mind has been said to
be subtile and of diverse forms. I have heard all thy discourses, but
still tranquillity of mind has not been mine. In this matter, various
means of quieting the mind have been related (by thee), O sire, but how
can peace of mind be secured from only a knowledge of the different kinds
of tranquillity, when I myself have been the instrument of bringing about
all this? Beholding thy body covered with arrows and festering with bad
sores, I fail to find, O hero, any peace of mind, at the thought of the
evils I have wrought. Beholding thy body, O most valiant of men, bathed
in blood, like a hill overrun with water from its springs, I am
languishing with grief even as the lotus in the rainy season. What can be
more painful than this, that thou, O grandsire, hast been brought to this
plight on my account by my people fighting against their foes on the
battle-field? Other princes also, with their sons and kinsmen, having met
with destruction on my account. Alas, what can be more painful than this.
Tell us, O prince, what destiny awaits us and the sons of Dhritarashtra,
who, driven by fate and anger, have done this abhorrent act. O lord of
men, I think the son of Dhritarashtra is fortunate in that he doth not
behold thee in this state. But I, who am the cause of thy death as well
as of that of our friends, am denied all peace of mind by beholding thee
on the bare earth in this sorry condition. The wicked Duryodhana, the
most infamous of his race, has, with all his troops and his brothers,
perished in battle, in the observance of Kshatriya duties. That
wicked-souled wight does not see thee lying on the ground. Verily, for
this reason, I would deem death to be preferable to life. O hero that
never swervest from virtue, had I with my brothers met with destruction
ere this at the hands of our enemies on the battle-field, I would not
have found thee in this pitiful plight, thus pierced with arrows. Surely,
O prince, the Maker had created is to become perpetrators of evil deeds.
O king, if thou wishest to do me good, do thou then instruct me in such a
way that I may be cleansed of this sin in even another world.'

"Bhishma replied, 'Why, O fortunate one, dost thou consider thy soul,
which is dependent (on God and Destiny and Time) to be the cause of thy
actions? The manifestation of its inaction is subtle and imperceptible to
the senses. In this connection is cited the ancient story of the
conversation between Mrityu and Gautami with Kala and the Fowler and the
serpent. There was, O son of Kunti, an old lady of the name of Gautami,
who was possessed of great patience and tranquillity of mind. One day she
found her son dead in consequence of having been bitten by a serpent. An
angry fowler, by name Arjunaka, bound the serpent with a string and
brought it before Gautami. He then said to her,--This wretched serpent
has been the cause of thy son's death, O blessed lady. Tell me quickly
how this wretch is to be destroyed. Shall I throw it into the fire or
shall I hack it into pieces? This infamous destroyer of a child does not
deserve to live longer.'

"Gautami replied, 'Do thou, O Arjunaka of little understanding, release
this serpent. It doth not deserve death at thy hands. Who is so foolish
as to disregard the inevitable lot that awaits him and burdening himself
with such folly sink into sin? Those that have made themselves light by
the practice of virtuous deeds, manage to cross the sea of the world even
as a ship crosses the ocean. But those that have made themselves heavy
with sin sink into the bottom, even as an arrow thrown into the water. By
killing the serpent, this my boy will not be restored to life, and by
letting it live, no harm will be caused to thee. Who would go to the
interminable regions of Death by slaying this living creature?'

"The fowler said, 'I know, O lady that knowest the difference between
right and wrong, that the great are afflicted at the afflictions of all
creatures. But these words which thou hast spoken are fraught with
instruction for only a self-contained person (and not for one plunged in
sorrow). Therefore, I must kill this serpent. Those who value peace of
mind, assign everything to the course of Time as the cause, but practical
men soon assuage their grief (by revenge). People through constant
delusion, fear loss of beatitude (in the next world for acts like these).
therefore, O lady, assuage thy grief by having this serpent destroyed (by
me).

"Gautami replied, 'People like us are never afflicted by (such
misfortune). Good men have their souls always intent on virtue. The death
of the boy was predestined: therefore, I am unable to approve of the
destruction of this serpent. Brahmanas do not harbour resentment, because
resentment leads to pain. Do thou, O good man, forgive and release this
serpent out of compassion.'

"The fowler replied, 'Let us earn great and inexhaustible merit hereafter
by killing (this creature), even as a man acquires great merit, and
confers it on his victim sacrificed as well, by sacrifice upon the altar.
Merit is acquired by killing an enemy: by killing this despicable
creature, thou shalt acquire great and true merit hereafter.'

"Gautami replied, 'What good is there in tormenting and killing an enemy,
and what good is won by not releasing an enemy in our power? Therefore, O
thou of benign countenance, why should we not forgive this serpent and
try to earn merit by releasing it?'

"The fowler replied, 'A great number (of creatures) ought to be protected
from (the wickedness of) this one, instead of this single creature being
protected (in preference to many). Virtuous men abandon the vicious (to
their doom): do thou, therefore, kill this wicked creature.'

"Gautami replied, 'By killing this serpent, O fowler, my son will not be
restored to life, nor do I see that any other end will be attained by its
death: therefore, do thou, O fowler, release this living creature of a
serpent.

"The fowler said, 'By killing Vritra, Indra secured the best portion (of
sacrificial offerings), and by destroying a sacrifice Mahadeva secured
his share of sacrificial offerings: do thou, therefore, destroy this
serpent immediately without any misgivings in thy mind!'

"Bhishma continued, 'The high-souled Gautami, although repeatedly incited
by the fowler for the destruction of the serpent did not bend her mind to
that sinful act. The serpent, painfully bound with the cord: sighing a
little and maintaining its composure with great difficulty, then uttered
these words slowly, in a human voice.'

"The serpent said, 'O foolish Arjunaka, what fault is there of mine? I
have no will of my own, and am not independent. Mrityu sent me on this
errand. By his direction have I bitten this child, and not out of any
anger or choice on my part. Therefore, if there be any sin in this, O
fowler, the sin is his.'

"The fowler said, 'If thou hast done this evil, led thereto by another,
the sin is thine also as thou art an instrument in the act. As in the
making of an earthen vessel the potter's wheel and rod and other things
are all regarded as causes, so art thou, O serpent, (cause in the
production of this effect). He that is guilty deserves death at my hands.
Thou, O serpent, art guilty. Indeed, thou confessest thyself so in this
matter!'

"The serpent said, 'As all these, viz., the potter's wheel, rod, and
other things, are not independent causes, even so I am not an independent
cause. Therefore, this is no fault of mine, as thou shouldst grant.
Shouldst thou think otherwise, then these are to be considered as causes
working in unison with one another. For thus working with one other, a
doubt arises regarding their relation as cause and effect. Such being the
case, it is no fault of mine, nor do I deserve death on this account, nor
am I guilty of any sin. Or, if thou thinkest that there is sin (in even
such causation), the sin lies in the aggregate of causes.'

"The fowler said, 'If thou art neither the prime cause nor the agent in
this matter, thou art still the cause of the death (of his child).
Therefore, thou dost deserve death in my opinion. If, O serpent, thou
thinkest that when an evil act is done, the doer is not implicated
therein, then there can be no cause in this matter; but having done this,
verily thou deservest death. What more dost thou think?'

"The serpent said, 'Whether any cause exists or not,[1] no effect is
produced without an (intermediate) act. Therefore, causation being of no
moment in either case, my agency only as the cause (in this matter) ought
to be considered in its proper bearings. If, O fowler, thou thinkest me
to be the cause in truth, then the guilt of this act of killing a living
being rests on the shoulders of another who incited me to this end.'[2]

"The fowler said, 'Not deserving of life, O foolish one, why dost thou
bandy so many words, O wretch of a serpent? Thou deservest death at my
hands. Thou hast done an atrocious act by killing this infant.'

"The serpent said, 'O fowler, as the officiating priests at a sacrifice
do not acquire the merit of the act by offering oblations of clarified
butter to the fire, even so should I be regarded with respect as to the
result in this connection.'

"Bhishma continued, 'The serpent directed by Mrityu having said this,
Mrityu himself appeared there and addressing the serpent spoke thus.

"Mrityu said, 'Guided. by Kala, I, O serpent, sent thee on this errand,
and neither art thou nor am I the cause of this child's death. Even as
the clouds are tossed hither and thither by the wind, I am like the
clouds, O serpent, influenced by Kala. All attitudes appertaining to
Sattwa or Rajas, or Tamas, are provoked by Kala, and operate in all
creatures. All creatures, mobile and immobile, in heaven, or earth, are
influenced by Kala. The whole universe, O serpent, is imbued with this
same influence of Kala. All acts in this world and all abstentions, as
also all their modifications, are said to be influenced by Kala, Surya,
Soma, Vishnu, Water, Wind, the deity of a hundred sacrificer, Fire, Sky,
Earth, Mitra and Parjanya, Aditi, and the Vasus, Rivers and Oceans, all
existent and non-existent objects, are created and destroyed by Kala.
Knowing this, why dost thou, O serpent, consider me to be guilty? If any
fault attaches to me in this, thou also wouldst be to blame.'

"The serpent said, 'I do not, O Mrityu, blame thee, nor do I absolve thee
from all blame. I only aver that I am directed and influenced (in my
actions) by thee. If any blame attaches to Kala, or, if it be not
desirable to attach any blame to him, it is not for me to scan the fault.
We have no right to do so. As it is incumbent on me to absolve myself
from this blame, so it is my duty to see that no blame attaches to
Mrityu.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Then the serpent, addressing Arjunaka, said--Thou
hast listened to what Mrityu has said. Therefore, it is not proper for
thee to torment me, who am guiltless, by tying me with this cord.'

"The fowler said, 'I have listened to thee, O serpent, as well as to the
words of Mrityu, but these, O serpent, do not absolve thee from all
blame. Mrityu and thyself are the causes of the child's death. I consider
both of you to be the cause and I do not call that to be the cause which
is not truly so. Accursed be the wicked and vengeful Mrityu that causes
affliction to the good. Thee too I shall kill that art sinful and
engaged, in sinful acts!'

"Mrityu said, 'We both are not free agents, but are dependent on Kala,
and ordained to do our appointed work. Thou shouldst not find fault with
us if thou dost consider this matter thoroughly.'

"The fowler said, 'If ye both, O serpent and Mrityu, be dependent on
Kala, I am curious to know how pleasure (arising from doing good) and
anger (arising from doing evil) are caused.'

"Mrityu said, 'Whatever is done is done under the influence of Kala. I
have said it before, O fowler, that Kala is the cause of all and that for
this reason we both, acting under the inspiration of Kala, do our
appointed work and therefore, O fowler, we two do not deserve censure
from thee in any way!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Then Kala arrived at that scene of disputation on
this point of morality, and spoke thus to the serpent and Mrityu and the
fowler Arjunaka assembled together.'

"Kala said, 'Neither Mrityu, nor this serpent, nor I, O fowler, am guilty
of the death of any creature. We are merely the immediate exciting causes
of the event. O Arjunaka, the Karma of this child formed the exciting
cause of our action in this matter. There was no other cause by which
this child came by its death. It was killed as a result of its own Karma.
It has met with death as the result of its Karma in the past. Its Karma
has been the cause of its destruction. We all are subject to the
influence of our respective Karma. Karma is an aid to salvation even as
sons are, and Karma also is an indicator of virtue and vice in man. We
urge one another even as acts urge one another. As men make from a lump
of clay whatever they wish to make, even so do men attain to various
results determined by Karma. As light and shadow are related to each
other, so are men related to Karma through their own actions. Therefore,
neither art thou, nor am I, nor Mrityu, nor the serpent, nor this old
Brahmana lady, is the cause of this child's death. He himself is the
cause here. Upon Kala, O king, expounding the matter in this way,
Gautami, convinced in her mind that men suffer according to their
actions, spoke thus to Arjunaka.'

"Gautami said, 'Neither Kala, nor Mrityu, nor the serpent, is the cause
in this matter. This child has met with death as the result of its own
Karma. I too so acted (in the past) that my son has died (as its
consequence). Let now Kala and Mrityu retire from this place, and do thou
too, O Arjunaka, release this serpent.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Then Kala and Mrityu and the serpent went back to
their respective destinations, and Gautami became consoled in mind as
also the fowler. Having heard all this, O king, do thou forego all grief,
and attain to peace of mind. Men attain to heaven or hell as the result
of their own Karma. This evil has neither been of thy own creation, nor
of Duryodhana's. Know this that these lords of Earth have all been slain
(in this war) as a result of acts of Kalas.'"

Vaisampayana said, "Having heard all this, the powerful and virtuous
Yudhishthira became consoled in mind, and again enquired as follows."



SECTION II

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, O wisest of men, O thou that art
learned in all the scriptures, I have listened to this great story, O
foremost of intelligent men. I am desirous of again hearing the recital
of some history full of religious instruction, and it behoves thee to
gratify me. O lord of Earth, tell me if any householder has ever
succeeded in conquering Mrityu by the practice of virtue. Do thou recite
this to me with all details!'

"Bhishma said, 'This ancient history is recited as an illustration of the
subject of the conquest by a householder, over Mrityu, through the
practice of virtue. The Prajapati Manu had a son, O king, of the name of
the Ikshwaku. Of that king, illustrious as Surya, were born a hundred
sons. His tenth son, O Bharata, was named Dasaswa, and this virtuous
prince of infallible prowess became the king of Mahismati. Dasaswa's son,
O king, was a righteous prince whose mind was constantly devoted to the
practice of truth and charity and devotion. He was known by the name of
Madiraswa and ruled over the Earth as her lord. He was constantly devoted
to the study of the Vedas as also of the science of arms. Madiraswa's son
was the king named Dyutimat who possessed great good fortune and power
and strength and energy. Dyutimat's son was the highly devout and pious
king who was famous in all the worlds under the name of Suvira. His soul
was intent on religion and he possessed wealth like another Indra, the
lord of the deities. Suvira too had a son who was invincible in battle,
and who was the best of all warriors and known by the name of Sudurjaya.
And Durjya too, possessed of a body like that of Indra, had a son who
beamed with splendour like that of fire. He was the great monarch named
Duryodhana who was one of the foremost of royal sages. Indra used to pour
rain profusely in the kingdom of this monarch, who never fled from the
battlefield and was possessed of valour like unto Indra himself. The
cities and the kingdom of this king were filled with riches and gems and
cattle and grain of various kinds. There was no miser in his kingdom nor
any person afflicted with distress or poverty. Nor was there in his
kingdom any person that was weak in body or afflicted with disease. That
king was very clever, smooth in speech, without envy, a master of his
passions, of a righteous soul, full of compassion, endued with prowess,
and not given to boasting. He performed sacrifices, and was
self-restrained and intelligent, devoted to Brahmanas and Truth. He never
humiliated others, and was charitable, and learned in the Vedas and the
Vedanta. The celestial river Narmada, auspicious and sacred and of cool
waters, in her own nature, O Bharata, courted him. He begot upon that
river, a lotus-eyed daughter, by name Sudarsana, who was, O king, endued
with great beauty. No creature, O Yudhisthira, had ever been born before
among womankind, that was, possessed of such beauty as that excellent
damsel who was the daughter of Duryodhana. The god Agni himself courted
the beautiful princess Sudarsana, and taking the shape of a Brahmana, O
monarch, sought her hand from the king. The king was unwilling to give
his daughter in marriage to the Brahmana who was poor and not of the same
rank with himself. Thereupon Agni vanished from his great sacrifice. The
king, grieved at heart, then addressed the Brahmanas, saying,--Of what
sin have I, ye excellent Brahmanas, or you, been guilty, that Agni should
disappear from this sacrifice, even as good done unto wicked men
disappears from their estimation. Great, indeed, must that sin of ours be
for which Agni has thus disappeared. Either must the sin be yours, or, it
must be mine. Do you fully investigate the matter.--Then hearing the
king's words, O foremost prince of Bharata's race, the Brahmanas,
restraining speech, sought with concentrated faculties the protection of
the god of fire. The divine carrier of oblations, resplendent as the
autumnal Sun, appeared before them, enveloping his self in glorious
refulgence. The high-souled Agni then addressed those excellent
Brahmanas, saying,--I seek the daughter of Duryodhana for my own self. At
this all those Brahmanas were struck with wonder, and rising on the
morrow, they related to the king what had been said by the fire-god. The
wise monarch, hearing the words of those utterers of Brahma, was
delighted at heart, and said,--Be it so.--The king craved a boon of the
illustrious fire-god as the marriage dower,--Do thou, O Agni, deign to
remain always with us here.--Be it so--said the divine Agni to that lord
of Earth. For this reason Agni has always been present in the kingdom of
Mahismati to this day, and was seen by Sahadeva in course of his
conquering expedition to the south. Then the king gave his daughter,
dressed in new garments and decked with jewels, to the high-souled deity,
and Agni too accepted, according to Vedic rites, the princess Sudarsana
as his bride, even as he accepts libations of clarified butter at
sacrifices, Agni was well pleased with her appearance, her beauty, grace,
character, and nobility of birth, and was minded to beget offspring upon
her. And a son by Agni, of the name of Sudarsana, was soon born of her.
Sudarsana also was, in appearance, as beautiful as the full moon, and
even in his childhood he attained to a knowledge of the supreme and
everlasting Brahma. There was also a king of the name of Oghavat, who was
the grandfather of Nriga. He had a daughter of the name of Oghavati, and
a son too of the name of Ogharatha born unto him. King Oghavat gave his
daughter Oghavati, beautiful as a goddess, to the learned Sudarsana for
wife. Sudarsana, O king, leading the life of a householder with Oghavati,
used to dwell in Kurukshetra with her. This intelligent prince of blazing
energy took the vow, O lord, of conquering Death by leading the life of
even a householder. The son of Agni, O king, said to Oghavati,--Do thou
never act contrary to (the wishes of) those that seek our hospitality.
Thou shouldst make no scruple about the means by which guests are to be
welcomed, even if thou have to offer thy own person. O beautiful one,
this vow is always present in the mind, since for householders, there is
no higher virtue than hospitality accorded to guests. Do thou always bear
this in mind without ever doubting it, if my words be any authority with
thee. O sinless and blessed one, if thou hast any faith in me, do thou
never disregard a guest whether I be at thy side or at a distance from
thee! Unto him, with hands clasped and placed on her head, Oghavati
replied, saying,--'I shall leave nothing undone of what thou commandest
me.--Then Mrityu, O king, desiring to over-reach Sudarsana, began to
watch him for finding out his lathes. On a certain occasion, when the son
of Agni went out to fetch firewood from the forest, a graceful Brahmana
sought the hospitality of Oghavati with these words:--O beautiful lady,
if thou hast any faith in the virtue of hospitality as prescribed for
householders, then I would request thee to extend the rites of
hospitality to me to-day.--The princess of great fame, thus addressed by
that Brahmana, O king, welcomed him according to the rites prescribed in
the Vedas. Having offered him a seat, and water to wash his feet, she
enquired, saying,--What is thy business? What can I offer thee? The
Brahmana said unto her,--My business is with thy person, O blessed one.
Do thou act accordingly without any hesitation in thy mind. If the duties
prescribed for householders be acceptable to thee, do thou, O princess,
gratify me by offering up thy person to me.--Though tempted by the
princess with offers of diverse other things, the Brahmana, however, did
not ask for any other gift than the offer of her own person. Seeing him
resolved, that lady, remembering the directions which had before been
given to her by her husband, but overcome with shame, said, to that
excellent Brahmana,--Be it so.--Remembering the words of her husband who
was desirous of acquiring the virtue of householders, she cheerfully
approached the regenerate Rishi. Meanwhile, the son of Agni, having
collected his firewood, returned to his home. Mrityu, with his fierce and
inexorable nature, was constantly by his side, even, as one attends upon
one's devoted friend. When the son of Pavaka returned to his own
hermitage, he called Oghavati by name, and (receiving no answer)
repeatedly, exclaimed,--Whether art thou gone?--But the chaste lady,
devoted to her husband, being then locked in the arms of that Brahmana,
gave no reply to her husband. Indeed, that chaste woman, considering
herself contaminated became speechless, overcome with shame. Sudarsana,
addressing her again, exclaimed,--Where can my chaste wife be? Whither
has she gone? Nothing can be of greater moment to me than this (her
disappearance). Why does not that simple and truthful lady, devoted to
her husband, alas, answer to my call today as she used to do before with
sweet smiles? Then that Brahmana, who was within the hut, thus replied to
Sudarsana,--Do thou learn, O son of Pavaka, that a Brahmana guest has
arrived, and though tempted by this thy wife with diverse other offers of
welcome, I have, O best of Brahmanas, desired only her person, and this
fair-faced lady is engaged in welcoming me with due rites. Thou art at
liberty to do whatever thou thinkest to be suitable to this occasion.
Mrityu, armed with the iron club, pursued the Rishi at that moment,
desirous of compassing the destruction of one that would, he thought,
deviate from his promise. Sudarsana was struck with wonder, but casting
off all jealousy and anger by look, word, deed, or thought, said,--Do
thou enjoy thyself, O Brahmana. It is a great pleasure to me. A
householder obtain the highest merit by honouring a guest. It is said by
the learned that, as regards the householder, there is no higher merit
than what results unto him from a guest departing from his house after
having been duly honoured by him. My life, my wife, and whatever other
worldly possessions I have, are all dedicated to the use of my guests.
Even this is the vow that I have taken. As I have truly made this
statement, by that truth, O Brahmana, I shall attain to the knowledge of
Self. O foremost of virtuous men, the five elements, viz., fire, air,
earth, water, and sky, and the mind, the intellect and the Soul, and time
and space and the ten organs of sense, are all present in the bodies of
men, and always witness the good and evil deeds that men do. This truth
has today been uttered by me, and let the gods bless me for it or destroy
me if I have spoken falsely. At this, O Bharata, there arose in all
directions, in repeated echoes, a voice, crying,--This is true, this is
not false. Then that Brahmana came out of the hovel, and like the wind
rising and encompassing both Earth and sky, and making the three worlds
echo with Vedic sounds, and calling that virtuous man by name, and
congratulating him said,--O sinless one, I am Dharma; All glory to thee.
I came here, O truth-loving one, to try thee, and I am well pleased with
thee by knowing thee to be virtuous. Thou hast subdued and conquered
Mrityu who always has pursued thee, seeking thy laches? O best of men, no
one in the three worlds has the ability to insult, even with looks, this
chaste lady devoted to her husband, far less to touch her person. She has
been protected from defilement by thy virtue and by her own chastity.
There can be nothing contrary to what this proud lady will say. This
utterer of Brahma, endued with austere penances, shall, for the salvation
of the world, be metamorphosed into a mighty river. And thou shalt attain
to all the worlds in this thy body, and as truly as the science of Yoga
is within her control, this highly blessed lady will follow thee with
only half of her corporeal self, and with the other half will she be
celebrated as the river Oghavati! And thou shalt attain with her to all
the worlds that acquired through penances, Those eternal and everlasting
worlds from which none cometh back will be attained by thee even in this
gross body of thine. Thou hast conquered Death, and attained to the
highest of all felicities, and by thy own power (of mind), attaining to
the speed of thought, thou hast risen above the power of the five
elements! By thus adhering to the duties of a householder, thou hast
conquered thy passions, desires, and anger, and this princess, O prince
of virtuous men has, by serving thee, conquered affliction, desire,
illusion, enmity and lassitude of mind!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Then the glorious Vasava (the lord of the gods),
riding in a fine chariot drawn by a thousand white horses, approached
that Brahmana. Death and Soul, all the worlds, all the elements,
intellect, mind, time, and space as also desire and wrath, were all
conquered. There-fore, O best of men, do thou bear this in mind, that to
a householder there is no higher divinity than the guest. It is said by
the learned that the blessings of an honoured guest are more efficacious
than the merit of a hundred sacrifices. Whenever a deserving guest seeks
the hospitality of a householder and is not honoured by him, he takes
away (with him) all the virtues of the latter giving him his sins (in
return). I have now recited to thee, my son, this excellent story as to
how Death was conquered of old by a householder. The recital of this
excellent story confers glory, fame, and longevity (upon those that
listen to it). The man that seeks worldly prosperity should consider it
as efficacious in removing all evil. And, O Bharata, the learned man that
daily recites this story of the life of Sudarsana attains to the regions
of the blessed.'"



SECTION III

"Yudhishthira said, 'If, O prince, Brahmanahood be so difficult of
attainment by the three classes (Kshatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras), how
then did the high souled Viswamitra, O king, though a Kshatriya (by
birth), attain to the status of a Brahmana? I desire to know this, O
sire. Therefore, do thou truly relate this matter to me. That powerful
man, O sire, by virtue of his austerities, destroyed in a moment the
hundred sons of the high-souled Vasishtha. While under the influence of
anger, he created numerous evil spirits and Rakshasas of mighty vigour
and resembling the great destroyer Kala himself. The great and learned
race of Kusika, numbering hundreds of regenerate sages and belauded by
the Brahmanas, was founded in this world of men by him. Sunasepha of
austere penances, the son of Richika, having been sought to be slain as
an animal in the great sacrifice of Amvarisha, obtained his deliverance
through Viswamitra. Harishchandra, having pleased the gods at a
sacrifice, became a son of the wise Viswamitra. For not having honoured
their eldest brother Devarat, whom Viswamitra got as a son from the gods,
the other fifty brothers of his were cursed, and all of them became
Chandalas. Trisanku, the son of Ikshwaku, through the curse of Vasistha
became a Chandala, and when abandoned by his friends, and remaining
suspended with his head downwards in the lower regions, was translated to
heaven at the pleasure of Viswamitra. Viswamitra had a large river, by
name Kausika, that was frequented by celestial Rishis. This sacred and
auspicious stream was frequented by the gods and regenerate Rishis. For
disturbing his devotions, the famous celestial nymph Rambha of fine
bracelets, was cursed and metamorphosed into a rock. Through fear of
Viswamitra the glorious Vasishtha, in olden times, binding himself with
creepers, threw himself down into a river and again rose released from
his bonds. In consequence of this, that large and sacred river become
thenceforth celebrated by the name of Vipasa.[3] He prayed to the
glorious and puissant Indra who was pleased with him and absolved him
from a curse.[4] Remaining on the northern side of the firmament, he
sheds his lustre from a position in the midst of the seven regenerate
Rishis,[5] and Dhruva the son of Uttanpada[6]. These are his achievements
as well as many others. O descendant of Kuru, as they were performed by a
Kshatriya, my curiosity has been roused in this matter. Therefore, O
foremost one of Bharata's race, do thou relate this matter to me truly.
How without casting off his corporeal frame and taking another tenement
of flesh could he become a Brahmana? Do thou, O sire, truly relate this
matter to me as thou hast related to me the story of Matanga. Matanga was
born as a Chandala,[7] and could not attain to Brahmanahood,(with all his
austerities) but how could this man attain to the status of a Brahmana?"



SECTION IV

"Bhishma said, 'Listen truly in detail, O son of Pritha, how in olden
times Viswamitra attained to the status of a Brahmana Rishi. There was, O
foremost of Bharata's descendants, in the race of Bharata, a king of the
name of Ajamida, who performed many sacrifices and was the best of all
virtuous men. His son was the great king named Jahnu. Ganga was the
daughter of this high-minded prince. The farfamed and equally virtuous
Sindhudwipa was the son of this prince. From Sindhudwipa sprung the great
royal sage Valakaswa. His son was named Vallabha who was like a second
Dharma in embodied form. His son again was Kusika who was refulgent with
glory like unto the thousand-eyed Indra. Kusika's son was the illustrious
King Gadhi who, being childless and desiring to have a son born unto him,
repaired to the forest. Whilst living there, a daughter was born unto
him. She was called Satyavati by name, and in beauty of appearance she
had no equal on Earth. The illustrious son of Chyavana, celebrated by the
name of Richika, of the race of Bhrigu, endued with austere penances,
sought the hand of this lady. Gadhi, the destroyer of his enemies,
thinking him to be poor, did not bestow her in marriage upon the
high-souled Richika. But when the latter, thus dismissed, was going away,
the excellent king, addressing him said,--'If thou givest me a marriage
dower thou shalt have my daughter for thy wife.'

"Richika said, 'What dower, O king, shall I offer thee for the hand of
thy daughter? Tell me truly, without feeling any hesitation in the
matter. Gadhi said,--'O descendant of Bhrigu, do thou give me a thousand
horses fleet as the wind, and possessing the hue of moon-beams, and each
having one ear black.'

"Bhishma said, 'Then that mighty son of Chyavana who was the foremost of
Bhrigu's race, besought the deity Varuna, the son of Aditi, who was the
lord of all the waters.--O best of gods, I pray to thee to give me a
thousand horses, all endued with the speed of the wind and with
complexion as effulgent as the moon's, but each having one ear black. The
god Varuna, the son of Aditi, said to that excellent scion of Bhrigu's
race,--Be it so. Wheresoever thou shalt seek, the horses shalt arise (in
thy presence).--As soon as Richika thought of them, there arose from the
waters of Ganga thousand high-mettled horses, as lustrous in complexion
as the moon. Not far from Kanyakubja, the sacred bank of Ganga is still
famous among men as Aswatirtha in consequence of the appearance of those
horses at that place. Then Richika, that best of ascetics, pleased in
mind, gave those thousand excellent horses unto Gadhi as the
marriage-dower. King Gadhi, filled with wonder and fearing to be cursed,
gave his daughter, bedecked with jewels, unto that son of Bhrigu. That
foremost of regenerate Rishis accepted her hand in marriage according to
the prescribed rites. The princess too was well-pleased at finding
herself the wife of that Brahmana. That foremost of regenerate Rishis, O
Bharata, was well pleased with her conduct and expressed a wish to grant
her boon. The princess, O excellent king, related this to her mother. The
mother addressed the daughter that stood before her with down-cast eyes,
saving,--It behoves thee, O my daughter, to secure a favour for me also
from thy husband. That sage of austere penances is capable of granting a
boon to me, the boon, viz. of the birth of a son to me.--Then, O king,
returning quickly to her husband Richika, the princess related to him all
that had been desired by her mother. Richika said,--By my favour, O
blessed one, she will soon give birth to a son possessed of every virtue.
May thy request be fulfilled. Of thee too shall be born a mighty and
glorious son who, endued with virtue, shall perpetuate my race. Truly do
I say this unto thee! When you two shall bathe in your season, she shall
embrace a peepul tree, and thou, O excellent lady, shalt likewise embrace
a fig tree, and by so doing shall ye attain the object of your desire. O
sweetly-smiling lady, both she and you shall have to partake of these two
sacrificial offerings (charu)[8]rated with hymns, and then shall ye
obtain sons (as desired).--At this, Satyavati, delighted at heart, told
her mother all that had been said by Richika as also of the two balls of
charu. Then the mother, addressing her daughter Satyavati, said:--O
daughter, as I am deserving of greater consideration from thee than thy
husband, do thou obey my words. The charu, duly consecrated with hymns,
which thy husband has given to thee, do thou give unto me and thyself
take the one that has been prescribed for me. O sweetly-smiling one of
blameless character, if thou hast any respect for my word, let us change
the trees respectively designed for us. Every one desires to possess an
excellent and stainless being for his own son. The glorious Richika too
must have acted from a similar motive in this matter, as will appear in
the end. For this reason, O beautiful girl, my heart inclines towards thy
charu, and thy tree, and thou too shouldst consider how to secure an
excellent brother for thyself.--The mother and the daughter Satyavati
having acted in this way, they both, O Yudhishthira, became big with
child. And that great Rishi, the excellent descendant of Bhrigu, finding
his wife quick with child, was pleased at heart, and addressing her,
said,--O excellent lady, thou hast not done well in exchanging the charu
as will soon become apparent. It is also clear that thou hast changed the
trees. I had placed the entire accumulated energy of Brahma in thy charu
and Kshatriya energy in the charu of thy mother. I had so ordered that
thou wouldst give birth to a Brahmana whose virtues would be famous
throughout the three worlds, and that she (thy mother) would give birth
to an excellent Kshatriya. But now, O excellent lady, that thou hast
reversed the order (of the charu) so, thy mother will give birth to an
excellent Brahmana and thou too, O excellent lady, will give birth to a
Kshatriya terrible in action. Thou hast not done will, O lady, by acting
thus out of affection for thy mother.--Hearing this, O king the excellent
lady Satyavati, struck with sorrow, fell upon the ground like a beautiful
creeper cut in twain. Regaining her senses and bowing unto her lord with
head (bent), the daughter of Gadhi said to her husband, that foremost one
of Bhrigu's race,--O regenerate Rishi, O thou that art foremost amongst
those versed in Brahma, do thou take pity on me, thy wife, who is thus
appeasing thee and so order that a Kshatriya son may not be born unto me.
Let my grandson be such a one as will be famous for his terrible
achievements, if it be thy desire, but not my son, O Brahmana. Do thou
confer this favour on me.--Be it so,--said that man of austere penances
to his wife and then, O king, she gave birth to a blessed son named
Jamadagni. The celebrated wife of Gadhi too gave birth to the regenerate
Rishi Viswamitra versed in the knowledge of Brahma, by favour of that
Rishi. The highly devout Viswamitra, though a Kshatriya, attained to the
state of a Brahmana and became the founder of a race of Brahmanas. His
sons became high-souled progenitors of many races of Brahmanas who were
devoted to austere penances, learned in the Vedas, and founders, of many
clans. The adorable Madhuchcchanda and the mighty Devrat, Akshina,
Sakunta, Vabhru, Kalapatha, the celebrated Yajnavalkya, Sthula of high
vows, Uluka, Mudgala, and the sage Saindhavayana, the illustrious
Valgujangha and the great Rishi Galeva, Ruchi, the celebrated Vajra, as
also Salankayana, Liladhya and Narada, the one known as Kurchamuka, and
Vahuli, Mushala, as also Vakshogriva, Anghrika, Naikadrik, Silayupa,
Sita, Suchi, Chakraka, Marrutantavya, Vataghna, Aswalayana, and
Syamayana, Gargya, and Javali, as also Susruta, Karishi, Sangsrutya, and
Para Paurava, and Tantu, the great sage Kapila, Tarakayana, Upagahana,
Asurayani, Margama, Hiranyksha, Janghari, Bhavravayani, and Suti,
Bibhuti, Suta, Surakrit, Arani, Nachika, Champeya, Ujjayana, Navatantu,
Vakanakha, Sayanya, Yati, Ambhoruha, Amatsyasin, Srishin, Gardhavi
Urjjayoni, Rudapekahin, and the great Rishi Naradin,--these Munis were
all sons of Viswamitra and were versed in the knowledge of Brahma. O king
Yudhishthira, the highly austere and devout Viswamitra, although a
Kshatriya (by descent), became a Brahmana for Richika having placed the
energy of supreme Brahma (in the charu), O foremost prince of Bharata's
race, I have now related to you, with all details, the story of the birth
of Viswamitra who was possessed of energy of the sun, the moon, and the
fire-god. O best of kings, if thou hast any doubt with regard to any
other matter, do thou let me know it, so that I may remove it.'"



SECTION V

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou that knowest the truths of religion, I wish
to hear of the merits of compassion, and of the characteristics of devout
men. Do thou, O sire, describe them to me.'

"Bhishma said, In this connection, this ancient legend, the story of
Vasava and the high-minded Suka, is cited as an illustration. In the
territories of the king of Kasi, a fowler, having poisoned arrows with
him went out of his village on a hunting excursion in search of
antelopes. Desirous of obtaining, meat, when in a big forest in pursuit
of the chase, he discovered a drove of antelopes not far from him, and
discharged his arrow at one of them. The arrows of that folder of
irresistible arms, discharged for the destruction of the antelope, missed
its aim and pierced a mighty forest-tree. The tree, violently pierced
with that arrow tipped with virulent poison, withered away, shedding its
leaves and fruits. The tree having thus withered a parrot that had lived
in a hollow of its trunk all his life, did not leave his nest out of
affection for the lord of the forest. Motionless and without food silent
and sorrowful, that grateful and virtuous parrot also withered away with
the tree. The conqueror of Paka (Indra) was struck with wonder upon
finding that high-souled, and generous-hearted bird thus uninfluenced by
misery or happiness and possessing extraordinary resolution. Then the
thought arose in Sakra's mind,--How could this bird come to possess
humane and generous feelings which are impossible in one belonging to the
world of lower animals? Perchance, there is nothing wonderful in the
matter, for all creatures are seen to evince kindly and generous feelings
towards others.--Assuming then the shape of a Brahmana, Sakra descended
on the Earth and addressing the bird, said,--O Suka, O best of birds, the
grand-daughter (Suki) of Daksha has become blessed (by having thee as her
offspring). I ask thee, for what reason dost thou not leave this withered
tree?--Thus questioned, the Suka bowed unto him and thus
replied:--Welcome to thee O chief of the gods, I have recognised thee by
the merit of my austere penances--Well-done, well-done!--exclaimed the
thousand-eyed deity. Then the latter praised him in his mind, saying,--O,
how wonderful is the knowledge which he possesses.--Although the
destroyer of Vala knew that parrot to be of a highly virtuous character
and meritorious in action, he still enquired of him about the reason of
his affection for the tree. This tree is withered and it is without
leaves and fruits and is unfit to be the refuge of birds. Why dost thou
then cling to it? This forest, too, is vast and in this wilderness there
are numerous other fine trees whose hollows are covered with leaves and
which thou canst choose freely and to thy heart's content. O patient one
exercising due discrimination in thy wisdom, do thou forsake this old
tree that is dead and useless and shorn of all its leaves and no longer
capable of any good.'"

"Bhishma said, 'The virtuous Suka, hearing these words of Sakra, heaved a
deep sigh and sorrowfully replied unto him, saying--O consort of Sachi,
and chief of the gods, the ordinances of the deities are always to be
obeyed. Do thou listen to the reason of the matter in regard to which
thou hast questioned me. Here, within this tree, was I born, and here in
this tree have I acquired all the good traits of my character, and here
in this tree was I protected in my infancy from the assaults of my
enemies. O sinless one, why art thou, in thy kindness, tampering with the
principle of my conduct in life? I am compassionate, and devoutly intent
on virtue, and steadfast in conduct. Kindliness of feeling is the great
test of virtue amongst the good, and this same compassionate and humane
feeling is the source of perennial felicity to the virtuous. All the gods
question thee to remove their doubts in religion, and for this reason, O
lord, thou hast been placed in sovereignty over them all. It behoves thee
not, O thousand-eyed one, to advise me now to abandon this tree for ever.
When it was capable of good, it supported my life. How can I forsake it
now?--The virtuous destroyer of Paka, pleased with these well-meant words
of the parrot, thus said to him:--I am gratified with thy humane and
compassionate disposition. Do thou ask a boon of me.--At this, the
compassionate parrot craved this boon of him, saying,--Let this tree
revive.--Knowing the great attachment of the parrot to that tree and his
high character, Indra, well-pleased, caused the tree to be quickly
sprinkled over with nectar. Then that tree became replenished and
attained to exquisite grandeur through the penances of the parrot, and
the latter too, O great king, at the close of his life, obtained the
companionship of Sakra by virtue of that act of compassion. Thus, O lord
of men, by communion and companionship with the pious, people attain all
the objects of their desire even as the tree die through its
companionship with the parrot.'"



SECTION VI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O learned sire that art versed in all the
scriptures, of Exertion and Destiny which is the most powerful?'

"Bhishma said, 'This ancient story of the conversation of Vasishtha and
Brahma, O Yudhishthira, is an illustration in point. In olden times the
adorable Vasishtha enquired of Brahma as to which among these two, viz.,
the Karma of a creature acquired in this life, or that acquired in
previous lives (and called Destiny), is the more potent in shaping his
life. Then, O king, the great god Brahma, who had sprung from the
primeval lotus, answered him in these exquisite and well-reasoned words,
full of meaning.'"

"Brahma said, 'Nothing comes into existence without seed. Without seed,
fruits do not grow. From seeds spring other seeds. Hence are fruits known
to be generated from seeds. Good or bad as the seed is that the
husbandman soweth in his field, good or bad are the fruits that he reaps.
As, unsown with seed, the soil, though tilled, becomes fruitless, so,
without individual Exertion, Destiny is of no avail. One's own acts are
like the soil, and Destiny (or the sum of one's acts in previous births)
is compared to the seed. From the union of the soil and the seed doth the
harvest grow. It is observed every day in the world that the doer reaps
the fruit of his good and evil deeds; that happiness results from good
deeds, and pain from evil ones; that acts, when done, always fructify;
and that, if not done, no fruit arises. A man of (good) acts acquires
merits with good fortune, while an idler falls away from his estate, and
reaps evil like the infusion of alkaline matter injected into a wound. By
devoted application, one acquires beauty, fortune, and riches of various
kinds. Everything can be secured by Exertion: but nothing can be gained
through Destiny alone, by a man that is wanting in personal Exertion.
Even so does one attain to heaven, and all the objects of enjoyment, as
also the fulfilment of one's heart's desires by well-directed individual
Exertion. Al! the luminous bodies in the firmament, all the deities, the
Nagas, and the Rakshasas, as also the Sun and the Moon and the Winds,
have attained to their high status by evolution from man's status,
through dint of their own action. Riches, friends, prosperity descending
from generation to generation, as also the graces of life, are difficult
of attainment by those that are wanting in Exertion. The Brahmana attains
to prosperity by holy living, the Kshatriya by prowess, the Vaisya by
manly exertion, and the Sudra by service. Riches and other objects of
enjoyment do not follow the stingy, nor the impotent, nor the idler. Nor
are these ever attained by the man that is not active or manly or devoted
to the exercise of religious austerities. Even he, the adorable Vishnu,
who created the three worlds with the Daityas and all the gods, even He
is engaged in austere penances in the bosom of the deep. If one's Karma
bore no fruit, then all actions would become fruitless, and relying on
Destiny men would become idlers. He who, without pursuing the human modes
of action, follows Destiny only, acts in vain, like unto the woman that
has an impotent husband. In this world the apprehension that accrues from
performance of good or evil actions is not so great if Destiny be
unfavourable as one's apprehension of the same in the other world if
Exertion be wanting while here.[9] Man's powers, if properly exerted,
only follow his Destiny, but Destiny alone is incapable of conferring any
good where Exertion is wanting. When it is seen that even in the
celestial regions, the position of the deities themselves is unstable,
how would the deities maintain their own position or that of others
without proper Karma? The deities do not always approve of the good deeds
of others in this world, for, apprehending their own overthrow, they try
to thwart the acts of others. There is a constant rivalry between the
deities and the Rishis, and if they all have to go through their Karma,
still it can never be averted that there is no such thing as Destiny, for
it is the latter that initiates all Karma. How does Karma originate, if
Destiny form the prime spring of human action? (The answer is) that by
this means, an accretion of many virtues is made even in the celestial
regions. One's own self is one's friend and one's enemy too, as also the
witness of one's good and evil deeds. Good and evil manifest themselves
through Karma. Good and evil acts do not give adequate results.
Righteousness is the refuge of the gods, and by righteousness is
everything attained. Destiny thwarts not the man that has attained to
virtue and righteousness.

In olden times, Yayati, falling from his high estate in heaven descended
on the Earth but was again restored to the celestial regions by the good
deeds of his virtuous grandsons. The royal sage Pururavas, celebrated as
the descendant of Ila, attained to heaven through the intercession of the
Brahmanas. Saudasa, the king of Kosala, though dignified by the
performance of Aswamedha and other sacrifices, obtained the status of a
man-eating Rakshasa, through the curse of a great Rishi. Aswatthaman and
Rama, though both warriors and sons of Munis, failed to attain to heaven
by reason of their own actions in this world. Vasu, though he performed a
hundred sacrifices like a second Vasava, was sent to the nethermost
regions, for making a single false statement. Vali, the son of Virochana,
righteously bound by his promise, was consigned to the regions under the
Earth, by the prowess of Vishnu. Was not Janamejaya, who followed the
foot-prints of Sakra, checked and put down by the gods for killing a
Brahmana woman? Was not the regenerate Rishi Vaisampayana too, who slew a
Brahmana in ignorance, and was polluted by the slaughter of a child, put
down by the gods? In olden times the royal sage Nriga became transmuted
into a lizard. He had made gifts of kine unto the Brahmanas at his great
sacrifice, but this availed him not. The royal sage Dhundhumara was
overwhelmed with decrepitude even while engaged in performing his
sacrifices, and foregoing all the merits thereof, he fell asleep at
Girivraja. The Pandavas too regained their lost kingdom, of which they
had been deprived by the powerful sons of Dhritarashtra, not through the
intercession of the fates, but by recourse to their own valour. Do the
Munis of rigid vows, and devoted to the practice of austere penances,
denounce their curses with the aid of any supernatural power or by the
exercise of their own puissance attained by individual acts? All the good
which is attained with difficulty in this world is possessed by the
wicked, is soon lost to them. Destiny does not help the man that is
steeped in spiritual ignorance and avarice. Even as a fire of small
proportions, when fanned by the wind, becomes of mighty power, so does
Destiny, when joined with individual Exertion, increase greatly (in
potentiality). As with the diminution of oil in the lamp its light is
extinguished so does the influence of Destiny is lost if one's acts stop.
Having obtained vast wealth, and women and all the enjoyments of this
world, the man, without action is unable to enjoy them long, but the
high-souled man, who is even diligent, is able to find riches buried deep
in the Earth and watched over by the fates. The good man who is prodigal
(in religious charities and sacrifices) is sought by the gods for his
good conduct, the celestial world being better than the world of men, but
the house of the miser though abounding in wealth is looked upon by the
gods as the house of dead. The man that does not exert himself is never
contented in this world nor can Destiny alter the course of a man that
has gone wrong. So there is no authority inherent in Destiny. As the
pupil follows one's own individual perception, so the Destiny follows
Exertion. The affairs in which one's own Exertion is put forth, there
only Destiny shows its hand. O best of Munis, I have thus described all
the merits of individual Exertion, after having always known them in
their true significance with the aid of my yogic insight. By the
influence of Destiny, and by putting forth individual Exertion, do men
attain to heaven. The combined aid of Destiny and Exertion, becomes
efficacious.'"



SECTION VII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O the best of Bharata's race and the foremost of
great men, I wish to know what the fruits are of good deed. Do thou
enlighten me on this point.'"

"Bhishma said, 'I shall tell thee what thou hast asked. Do thou, O
Yudhishthira, listen to this which constitutes the secret knowledge of
the Rishis. Listen to me as I explain what the ends, long coveted, are
which are attained by men after death. Whatever actions are performed by
particular corporeal beings, the fruits thereof are reaped by the doers
while endued with similar corporeal bodies; for example, the fruits of
actions done with mind are enjoyed at the time of dreams, and those of
actions performed physically are enjoyed in the working state physically.
In whatever states creatures perform good or evil deeds, they reap the
fruits thereof in similar states of succeeding lives. No act done with
the aid of the five organs of sensual perception, is ever lost. The five
sensual organs and the immortal soul which is the sixth, remain its
witnesses. One should devote one's eye to the service of the guest and
should devote one's heart on the same; one should utter words that are
agreeable; one should also follow and worship (one's guest). This is
called Panchadakshin Sacrifice, (the sacrifice with five gifts). He who
offers good food to the unknown and weary travellers fatigued by a long
journey, attains to great merit. Those that use the sacrificial platform
as their only bed obtain commodious mansions and beds (in subsequent
births). Those that wear only rags and barks of trees for dress, obtain
good apparel and ornaments in next birth. One possessed of penances and
having his soul on Yoga, get vehicles and riding animals (as the fruit of
their renunciation in this life). The monarch that lies down by the side
of the sacrificial fire, attains to vigour and valour. The man who
renounces the enjoyment of all delicacies, attains to prosperity, and he
that abstains from animal food, obtains children and cattle, He who lies
down with his head downwards, or who lives in water, or who lives
secluded and alone in the practice of Brahmacharya, attains to all the
desired ends. He who offers shelter to a guest and welcomes him with
water to wash his feet as also with food, light and bed, attains to the
merits of the sacrifice with the five gifts. He who lays himself down on
a warrior's bed on the battle-field in the posture of a warrior, goes to
those eternal regions where all the objects of desire are fulfilled. A
man, O king, attains to riches that makes charitable gifts. One secures
obedience to one's command by the vow of silence, all the enjoyments of
life by practice of austerities, long life by Brahmacharya, and beauty,
prosperity and freedom from disease by abstaining from injury to others.
Sovereignty falls to the lot of those that subsist on fruits and roots
only. Residence in heaven is attained by those that live on only leaves
of trees. A man, O king, is said to obtain happiness, by abstention from
food. By confining one's diet to herbs alone, one becomes possessed of
cows. By living on grass one attains to the celestial regions. By
foregoing all intercourse with one's wife and making ablutions three
times during the day and by inhaling the air only for purposes of
subsistence, one obtains the merit of a sacrifice. Heaven is attained by
the practice of truth, nobility of birth by sacrifices. The Brahmana of
pure practices that subsists on water only, and performs the Agnihotra
ceaselessly, and recites the Gayatri, obtains a kingdom. By abstaining
food or by regulating it, one attains to residence in heaven. O king, by
abstaining from all but the prescribed diet while engaged in sacrifices,
and by making pilgrimage for twelve years, one attains to a place better
than the abodes reserved for heroes. By reading all the Vedas, one is
instantly liberated from misery, and by practising virtue in thought, one
attains to the heavenly regions. That man who is able to renounce that
intense yearning of the heart for happiness and material enjoyments,--a
yearning that is difficult of conquest by the foolish and that doth not
abate with the abatement of bodily vigour and that clings like a fatal
disease unto him,--is able to secure happiness. As the young calf is able
to recognise its dam from among a thousand cows, so does the previous
acts of a man pursue him (in all his different transformations). As the
flowers and fruits of a tree, unurged by visible influences, never miss
their proper season, so does Karma done in a previous existence bring
about its fruits in proper time. With age, man's hair grows grey, his
teeth become loose; his eyes and ears too become dim in action; but the
only thing that does not abate is his desire for enjoyments. Prajapati is
pleased with those acts that please one's father, and the Earth is
pleased with those acts that please one's mother, and Brahma is adored
with those acts that please one's preceptor. Virtue is honoured by him
who honours these three. The acts of those that despise these three do
not avail them.'"

"Vaisampayana said, 'The princes of Kuru's race became filled with wonder
upon listening to this speech of Bhishma. All of them became pleased in
mind and overpowered with joy. As Mantras applied with a desire to win
victory, or the performance of the Shoma sacrifice made without proper
gifts, or oblations poured on the fire without proper hymns, become
useless and lead to evil consequences, even so sin and evil results flow
from falsehood in speech. O prince, I have thus related to thee this
doctrine of the fruition of good and evil acts, as narrated by the Rishis
of old. What else dost thou wish to hear?"



 SECTION VIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Who are deserving of worship? Who are they unto whom
one may bow? Who are they, O Bharata, unto whom thou wouldst bend thy
head? Who, again, are they whom thou likest? Tell me all this, O prince.
What is that upon which thy mind dwells when affliction overwhelms thee?
Do thou discourse to me on what is beneficial here, that is, in this
region of human beings, as also hereafter.'"[10]

"Bhishma said, 'I like those regenerate persons whose highest wealth is
Brahman, whose heaven consists in the knowledge of the soul, and whose
penances are constituted by their diligent study of the Vedas. My heart
yearns after those in whose race persons, young and old diligently bear
the ancestral burthens without languishing under them. Brahmanas
well-trained in several branches of knowledge, self-controlled,
mild-speeched, conversant with the scriptures, well-behaved, possessed of
the knowledge of Brahman and righteous in conduct, discourse in
respectable assemblies like flights of swans.[11] Auspicious, agreeable,
excellent, and well-pronounced are the words, O Yudhishthira, which they
utter with a voice as deep as that of the clouds. Fraught with happiness
both temporal and spiritual, such words are uttered by them in the courts
of monarchs, themselves being received with honour and attention and
served with reverence by those rulers of men. Indeed, my heart yearns
after them who listen to the words uttered in assemblies or the courts of
kings by persons endued with knowledge and all desirable attributes, and
are respected by others. My heart, O monarch, always yearns after them
who, for the gratification of Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira, give unto them,
with devotion, food that is well-cooked and clean and wholesome. It is
easy to fight in battle, but not so to make a gift without pride or
vanity. In this world, O Yudhishthira, there are brave men and heroes by
hundreds. While counting them, he that is a hero in gifts should be
regarded as superior, O amiable one, if I had been even a vulgar
Brahmana, I would have regarded myself as very great, not to speak of one
born in a good Brahmana family endued with righteousness of conduct, and
devoted to penances and learning. There is no one, O son of Pandu, in
this world that is dearer to me than thou, O chief of Bharata's race but
dearer to me than thou are the Brahmanas. And since, O best of the Kurus,
the Brahmanas are very much dearer to me than thou, it is by that truth
that I hope to go to all those regions of felicity which have been
acquired by my sire Santanu. Neither my sire, nor my sire's sire, nor any
one else connected with me by blood, is dearer to me than the Brahmanas.
I do not expect any fruit, small or great, from my worship of the
Brahmanas (for I worship them as deities because they are deserving of
such worship).[12] In consequence of what I have done to the Brahmanas in
thought, word, and deed, I do not feel any pain now (even though I am
lying on a bed of arrows). People used to call me as one devoted to the
Brahmanas. This style of address always pleased me highly. To do good to
the Brahmanas is the most sacred of all sacred acts. I behold many
regions of beautitude waiting for me that have reverentially walked
behind the Brahmanas. Very soon shall I repair to those regions for
everlasting time, O son. In this world, O Yudhishthira, the duties of
women have reference to and depend upon their husbands. To a woman,
verily, the husband is the deity and he is the highest end after which
she should strive. As the husband is to the wife, even so are the
Brahmanas unto Kshatriyas. If there be a Kshatriya of full hundred years
of age and a good Brahmana child of only ten years, the latter should be
regarded as a father and the former as a son, for among the two, verily,
the Brahmana is superior. A woman in the absence of her husband, takes
his younger brother for her lord; even so the Earth, not having obtained
the: Brahmana, made the Kshatriya her lord. The Brahmanas should be
protected like sons and worshipped like sires or preceptors. Indeed, O
best of the Kurus, they should be waited upon with reverence even as
people wait with reverence upon their sacrificial or Homa fires. The
Brahmanas are endued with simplicity and righteousness. They are devoted
to truth. They are always engaged in the good of every creature. Yet when
angry they are like snakes of virulent poison. They should, for these
reasons, be always waited upon and served with reverence and humility.
One should, O Yudhishthira, always fear these two, viz. Energy and
Penances. Both these should be avoided or kept at a distance. The effects
of both are speedy. There is the superiority, however, of Penances, viz.,
that Brahmanas endued with Penances, O monarch, can, if angry, slay the
object of their wrath (regardless of the measure of Energy with which
that object may be endued). Energy and Penances, each of the largest
measure, become neutralised if applied against a Brahmana that has
conquered wrath. If the two,--that is, Energy and Penances,--be set
against each other, then destruction would overtake both but not
destruction without, a remnant, for while Energy, applied against
Penances, is sure to be destroyed without leaving a remnant. Penances
applied against Energy cannot be destroyed completely.[13] As the
herdsman, stick in hand, protects the herd, even so should the Kshatriya
always protect the Vedas and the Brahmanas. Indeed, the Kshatriya should
protect all righteous Brahmanas even as a sire protects his sons. He
should always have his eye upon the house of the Brahmanas for seeing
that their means of subsistence may not be wanting.'"



SECTION IX

"Yudhisthira said, 'O grandsire, O thou of great splendour, what do those
men become who, through stupefaction of intellect, do not make gifts unto
Brahmanas after having promised to make those gifts? O thou that art the
foremost of all righteous persons, do tell me what the duties are in this
respect. Indeed, what becomes the end of those wicked wights that do not
give after having promised to give.'"

"Bhishma said, 'The person that, after having promised, does not give, be
it little or much, has the mortification to see his hopes (in every
direction) become fruitless like the hopes of a eunuch in respect of
progeny. Whatever good acts such a person does between the day of his
birth and that of his death, O Bharata, whatever libations he pours on
the sacrificial fire, whatever gifts he makes, O chief of Bharata's race,
and whatever penances he performs all become fruitless. They that are
conversant with the scriptures declare this as their opinion, arriving at
it, O chief of the Bharatas, with the aid of a well-ordered
understanding. Persons conversant with the scriptures are also of opinion
that such a man may be cleansed by giving away a thousand horses with
ears of a dark hue. In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between a jackal and an ape. While both were human beings, O
scorcher of foes, they were intimate friends. After death one of them
became a jackal and the other an ape. Beholding the jackal one day eating
an animal carcase in the midst of a crematorium, the ape, remembering his
own and his friend's former birth as human beings, addressed him,
saying,--Verily, what terrible sin didst thou perpetrate in thy former
birth in consequence of which thou art obliged in this birth to feed in a
crematorium upon such repulsive fare as the putrid carcase of an
animal?--Thus addressed, the jackal replied unto the ape, saying,--Having
promised to give unto a Brahmana I did not make him the gift. It is for
that sin, O ape, that I have fallen into this wretched order of
existence. It is for that reason that, when hungry, I am obliged to eat
such food.'

"Bhishma continued, 'The jackal then, O best of men, addressed the ape
and said,--What sin didst thou commit for which thou hast become an ape?'

"The ape said, 'In my former life I used to appropriate the fruits
belonging to Brahmanas. Hence have I become an ape. Hence it is clear
that one possessed of intelligence and learning should never appropriate
what belongs to Brahmanas. Verily, as one should abstain from this, one
should avoid also all disputes with Brahmanas. Having promised, one
should certainly make the promised gift unto them.'

"Bhishma continued, 'I heard this, O king, from my preceptor while he was
engaged in discoursing upon the subject of Brahmanas. I heard this from
that righteous person when he recited the old and sacred declaration on
this topic. I heard this from Krishna also, O king, while he was engaged
in discoursing, O son of Pandu, upon Brahmanas.[14] The property of a
Brahmana should never be appropriated. They should always be let alone.
Poor, or miserly, or young in years, they should never be disregarded.
The Brahmanas have always taught me this. Having promised to make them a
gift, the gift should be made. A superior Brahmana should never be
disappointed in the matter of his expectations. A Brahmana, O king, in
whom an expectation has been raised, has, O king, been said to be like a
blazing fire.[15] That man upon whom a Brahmana with raised expectations
casts his eye, is sure, O monarch, to be consumed even as a heap of straw
is capable of being consumed by a blazing fire.[16] When the Brahmana,
gratified (with honours and gifts) by the king addresses the king in
delightful and affectionate words, he becomes, O Bharata, a source of
great benefit to the king, for he continues to live in the kingdom like a
physician combating against diverse ills of the body.[17] Such a Brahmana
is sure to maintain by his puissance and good wishes, the sons and
grandsons and animals and relatives and ministers and other officers and
the city and the provinces of the king.[18] Even such is the energy, so
great, of the Brahmana like unto that of the thousand-rayed Surya
himself, on the Earth. There-fore, O Yudhishthira, if one wishes to
attain to a respectable or happy order of being in one's next birth, one
should, having passed the promise to a Brahmana, certainly keep it by
actually making the gift to him. By making gifts to a Brahmana one is
sure to attain to the highest heaven. Verily, the making of gifts is the
highest of acts that one can achieve. By the gifts one makes to a
Brahmana, the deities and the pitris are supported. Hence one possessed
of knowledge should ever make gifts unto the Brahmanas. O chief of the
Bharatas, the Brahmana is regarded as the highest object unto whom gifts
should be made. At no time should a Brahmana be received without being
properly worshipped."



SECTION X

"Yudhisthira said, 'I wish to know, O royal sage, whether any fault is
incurred by one who from interested or disinterested friendship imparts
instructions unto a person belonging to a low order of birth! O
grandsire, I desire to hear this, expounded to me in detail. The course
of duty is exceedingly subtile. Men are often seen to be stupefied in
respect of that course.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O king, I shall recite to thee, in
due order, what I heard certain Rishis say in days of yore. Instruction
should not be imparted unto one that belongs to a low or mean caste. It
is said that the preceptor who imparts instruction to such a person
incurs great fault. Listen to me, O chief of Bharata's race, as I recite
to thee, O Yudhishthira, this instance that occurred in days of old, O
monarch, of the evil consequences of the imparting of instruction unto a
low-born person fallen into distress. The incident which I shall relate
occurred in the asylum of certain regenerate sages that stood on the
auspicious breast of Himavat. There, on the breast of that prince of
mountains, was a sacred asylum adorned with trees of diverse kinds.
Overgrown also with diverse species of creepers and plants, it was the
resort of many animals and birds. Inhabited by Siddhas and Charanas also,
it was exceedingly delightful in consequence of the woods that flowered
these at every season. Many were the Brahmacharins that dwelt there, and
many belonging to the forest mode of life. Many also were the Brahmanas
that took up their residence there, that were highly blessed and that
resembled the sun or the fire in energy and effulgence. Ascetics of
diverse kinds, observant of various restraints and vows, as also others,
O chief of the Bharatas, that had undergone Diksha and were frugal in
fare and possessed of cleansed souls, took up their residence there.
Large numbers of Valakhilyas and many that were observant of the vow of
Sanyasa also, used to dwell there. The asylum, in consequence of all
this, resounded with the chanting of the Vedas and the sacred Mantras
uttered by its inhabitants. Once upon a time a Sudra endued with
compassion for all creatures, ventured to come into that asylum. Arrived
at that retreat, he was duly honoured by all the ascetics. Beholding
those ascetics of diverse classes that were endued with great energy,
that resembled the deities (in purity and power), and that were observing
diverse kinds of Diksha, O Bharata, the Sudra became highly pleased at
heart. Beholding everything, O chief of Bharata's race, the Sudra felt
inclined to devote himself to the practice of penances. Touching the feet
of the Kulapati (the head man of the group), O Bharata, he addressed him
saying,[19] 'Through thy grace, O foremost of regenerate persons, I
desire, to learn (and practise) the duties of religion. It behoveth thee,
O illustrious one, to discourse to me on those duties and introduce me
(by performing the rites of initiation) into a life of Renunciation. I am
certainly inferior in colour, O illustrious one, for I am by caste a
Sudra, O best of men. I desire to wait upon and serve you here. Be
gratified with me that humbly seek thy shelter.'"

"The Kulapati said, 'It is impossible that a Sudra should live here
adopting the marks specially intended for those practising lives of
Renunciation. If it pleases thee, thou mayest stay here, engaged in
waiting upon and serving us. Without doubt, by such service thou shalt
attain to many regions of high felicity.'"

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by the ascetic, the Sudra began to
reflect in his mind, O king, saying, How should I now act? Great is my
reverence for those religious duties that lead to merit. Let this,
however, be settled, that I shall do what would be for my benefit.'[20]
Proceeding to a spot that was distant from that asylum, he made a hut of
the twigs and leaves of trees. Erecting also a sacrificial platform, and
making a little space for his sleep, and some platforms for the use of
the deities, he began, O chief of the Bharatas, to lead a life regulated
by rigid observances and vows and to practise penances, abstaining
entirely from speech all the while. He began to perform ablutions thrice
a day, observe other vows (in respect of food and sleep), make sacrifices
to the deities, pour libations on the sacrificial fire, and adore the
worship and deities in this way. Restraining all carnal desires, living
abstemiously upon fruits and roots, controlling all his senses, he daily
welcomed and entertained all that came to his retreat as guests, offering
them herbs and fruits that grew plentifully around. In this way he passed
a very long time in that hermitage of his.[21] One day an ascetic came to
that Sudra's retreat for the purpose of making his acquaintance. The
Sudra welcomed and worshipped the Rishi with due rites, and gratified him
highly. Endued with great energy, and possessed of a righteous soul, that
Rishi of rigid vows conversed with his host on many agreeable subjects
and informed him of the place whence he had come. In this way, O chief of
the Bharatas, that Rishi, O best of men, came into the asylum of the
Sudra times out of a number for the object of seeing him. On one of these
occasions, the Sudra, O king, addressing the Rishi said,--I desire to
perform the rites that are ordained for the Pitris. Do thou instruct me
kindly in this matter.--Very well,--the Brahmana said in reply unto him,
O monarch. The Sudra then, purifying himself by a bath, brought water for
the Rishi to wash his feet, and he also brought some Kusa grass, and wild
herbs and fruits, and a sacred seat, and the seat called Vrishi. The
Vrishi, however, was placed by the Sudra towards the south, with his head
turned to the west. Beholding, this and knowing that it was against the
ordinance, the Rishi addressed the Sudra, saying,--Place the Vrishi with
its head turned towards the East, and having purified thyself, do thou
sit with thy face turned towards the north--The Sudra did everything as
the Rishi directed. Possessed of great intelligence, and observant of
righteousness, the Sudra received every direction, about the Sraddha, as
laid down in the ordinance, from that Rishi endued with penances
regarding the manner of spreading the Kusa grass, and placing the
Arghyas, and as regards the rites to be observed in the matter of the
libations to be poured and the food to be offered. After the rites in
honour of the Pitris had been accomplished, the Rishi, was dismissed by
the Sudra, whereupon he returned to his own abode.[22] After a long time,
the whole of which he passed in the practice of such penances and vows,
the Sudra ascetic met with his death in those woods. In consequence of
the merit he acquired by those practices, the Sudra in the next life,
took birth in the family of a great king, and in course of time became
possessed of great splendour. The regenerate Rishi also, when the time
came, paid his debt in Nature. In his next life, O chief of Bharata's
race, he took birth in the family of a priest. It was in this way that
those two, viz., that Sudra who had passed a life of penances and that
regenerate Rishi who had in kindness given the former some instructions
in the matter of the rites performed in honour of the Pitris, became
reborn, the one as scion of a royal race and the other as the member of a
priestly family. Both of them began to grow and both acquired great
knowledge in the usual branches of study. The Brahmana became well versed
in the Vedas as also in the Atharvans.[23] In the matter, again of all
sacrifices ordained in the Sutras, of that Vedanga which deals with
religious rites and observances, astrology and astronomy the reborn Rishi
attained great excellence. In the Sankhya philosophy too he began to take
great delight. Meanwhile, the reborn Sudra who had become a prince, when
his father, the king died, performed his last rites; and after he had
purified himself by accomplishing all the obsequial ceremonies, he was
installed by the subjects of his father as their king on his paternal
throne. But soon after his own installation as king, he installed the
reborn Rishi as his priest. Indeed, having made the Brahmana his priest,
the king began to pass his days in great happiness. He ruled his kingdom
righteously and protected and cherished all his subjects. Everyday,
however, the king on the occasion of receiving benedictions from his
priest as also of the performance of religious and other sacred rites,
smiled or laughed at him loudly. In this way, O monarch, the reborn Sudra
who had become a king, laughed at sight of his priest on numberless
occasions.[24] The priest, marking that the king always smiled or laughed
whenever he happened to cast his eyes on him, became angry. On one
occasion he met the king in a place where there was nobody else. He
pleased the king by agreeable discourse. Taking advantage of that moment,
O chief of Bharata's race, the priest addressed the king, saying,--'O
thou of great splendour, I pray thee to grant me a single boon.'

"The king said, 'O best of regenerate persons, I am ready to grant thee a
hundred of boons, what dost thou say then of one only? From the affection
I bear thee and the reverence in which I hold thee, there is nothing that
I cannot give thee.'

"The priest said, 'I desire to have only one boon, O king, thou hast been
pleased with me. Swear that thou wouldst tell me the truth instead of any
untruth.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by the priest, O Yudhishthira, the
king said unto him--So be it. If what thou wouldst ask me be known to me,
I shall certainly tell thee truly. If on the other hand, the matter be
unknown to me, I shall not say anything.'

"The priest said, 'Every day, on occasions of obtaining my benedictions,
when, again, I am engaged in the performance of religious rites on thy
behalf, on occasions also of the Homa and other rites of propitiation,
why is it that thou laughest upon beholding me? Seeing thee laugh at me
on all occasions, my mind shrinks with shame. I have caused thee to
swear, O king, that thou wouldst answer me truly. It does not behove thee
to say what is untrue. There must be some grave reason for thy behaviour.
Thy laughter cannot be causeless. Great is my curiosity to know the
reason. Do thou speak truly unto me.'

"The king said, 'When thou hast addressed me in this strain, O regenerate
one, I am bound to enlighten thee, even if the matter be one that should
not be divulged in thy hearing. I must tell thee the truth. Do thou
listen to me with close attention, O regenerate one. Listen to me, O
foremost of twice-born persons, as I disclose to thee what happened (to
us) in our former births. I remember that birth. Do thou listen to me
with concentrated mind. In my former life I was a Sudra employed in the
practice of severe penances. Thou, O best of regenerate persons, wert a
Rishi of austere penances. O sinless one, gratified with me, and impelled
by the desire of doing me good, thou, O Brahmana, wert pleased to give me
certain instructions in the rites I performed (on one occasion) in honour
of my Pitris. The instructions thou gayest me were in respect of the
manner of spreading the Vrishi and the Kusa blades and of offering
libations and meat and other food to the manes, O foremost of ascetics.
In consequence of this transgression of thine thou hast taken birth as a
priest, and I have taken birth as a king, O foremost of Brahmanas. Behold
the vicissitudes that Time brings about. Thou hast reaped this fruit in
consequence of thy having instructed me (in my former birth). It is for
this reason, O Brahmana, that I smile at sight of thee, O foremost of
regenerate persons. I do not certainly laugh at thee from desire of
disregarding thee. Thou art my preceptor.[25] At this change of condition
I am really very sorry. My heart burns at the thought. I remember our
former births, hence do I laugh at sight of thee. Thy austere penances
were all destroyed by the instructions thou gayest me. Relinquishing thy
present office of priest, do thou endeavour to regain a superior birth.
Do thou exert so that thou mayst not obtain in thy next life a birth
meaner than thy present one. Take as much wealth as thou wishest. O
learned Brahmana, and cleanse thy soul, O best of men.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Dismissed by the king (from the office of priest),
the Brahmana made many gifts, unto persons of his own order, of wealth
and land and villages. He observed many rigid and severe vows as laid
down by the foremost of Brahmanas. He sojourned to many sacred waters and
made many gifts unto Brahmanas in those places. Making gifts of kine unto
persons of the regenerate order, his soul became cleansed and he
succeeded in acquiring a knowledge of it. Repairing to that very asylum
whither he had lived in his former birth, he practised very severe
penances. As the consequence of all this, O foremost of kings, that
Brahmana succeeded in attaining to the highest success. He became an
object of veneration with all the ascetics that dwelt in that asylum. In
this way, O best of monarchs, that regenerate Rishi fell into great
distress. Unto Sudras, therefore, the Brahmanas should never give
instructions. Hence, O king, the Brahmana should avoid imparting
instructions (to such as are low-born), for it was by imparting
instruction to a low-born person a Brahmana came to grief. O best of
kings, the Brahmana should never desire to obtain instruction from, or
impart instruction to, a person that belongs to the lowest order.
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, the three orders, are regarded as
twice-born. By imparting instruction unto these, a Brahmana does not
incur any fault. They, therefore, that are good, should never discourse
on any subject, for imparting any instruction, before persons of the
inferior order. The course of morality is exceedingly subtile and
incapable of being comprehended by persons of uncleansed souls. It is for
this reason that ascetics adopt the vow of silence, and being respected
by all, pass through Diksha (initiation) without indulging in speech.[26]
For fear of saying what is incorrect or what may offend, ascetics often
forego speech itself. Even men that are righteous and possessed of every
accomplishment, and endued with truth and simplicity of behaviour, have
been known to incur great fault in consequence of words spoken
improperly. Instruction should never be imparted on anything unto any
person. If in consequence of the instructions imparted, the instructed
commit any sin, that sin, attaches to the Brahmana who imparted the
instruction. The man of wisdom, therefore, that desires to earn merit,
should always act with wisdom. That instruction which is imparted in
barter for money always pollutes the instructor.[27] Solicited by others,
one should say only what is correct after settling it with the aid of
reflection. One should impart instruction in such a way that one may, by
imparting it, earn merit. I have thus told thee everything respecting the
subject of instructions. Very often persons become plunged into great
afflictions in consequence of imparting instructions. Hence it is meet
that one should abstain from giving instruction unto others.'"



SECTION XI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, in what kind of man or woman,
O chief of the Bharatas, does the goddess of prosperity always reside?'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, narrate to thee what
occurred and what I have heard. Once on a time, beholding the goddess of
prosperity blazing with beauty and endued with the complexion of the
lotus, the princess Rukmini the mother of Pradyumna that bore the device
of the Makara on his banner, filled with curiosity, asked this question
in the presence of Devaki's son. Who are those beings by whose side thou
stayest and whom thou favours? Who again, are those whom thou dost not
bless with favour. O thou that art dear unto Him that is the lord of all
creatures, tell me this truly, O thou that art equal to a great Rishi in
penances and puissance. Thus addressed by the princess, the goddess of
prosperity, with a face as beautiful as the moon, and moved by grace, in
the presence of him who has Garuda on his banner, said these words in
reply that were sweet and charming.'

"Sree said, 'O blessed lady, I always reside with him that is eloquent,
active, attentive to business, free from wrath, given to the worship of
the deities, endued with gratitude, has his passions under complete
control, and is high-minded in everything. I never reside with one that
is inattentive to business, that is an unbeliever, that causes an
intermixture of races in consequence of his lustfulness, that is
ungrateful, that is of impure practices, that uses harsh and cruel words,
that is a thief, that cherishes malice towards his preceptors and other
seniors, those persons that are endued with little energy, strength,
life, and honour, that are distressed at every trifle, and that always
indulge in wrath. I never reside with these that think in one strain and
act in a different one.[28] I never reside also with him who never
desires any acquisition for himself, of him who is so blinded as to rest
content with the lot in which he finds himself without any exertion or
with those that are contented with small acquisitions. I reside with
those that are observant of the duties of their own order, or those that
are conversant with the duties of righteousness, or those that are
devoted to the service of the aged or those that have their passions
under control, or those that are endued with cleansed souls or those that
observe the virtue of forgiveness, or those that are able and prompt in
action, or with such women as are forgiving and self-restrained. I reside
with those women also that are devoted to truth and sincerity and that
worship the deities. I do not reside with those women also that do not
attend to household furniture and provisions scattered all around the
house, and that always utter words contrary to the wishes of their
husbands. I always avoid those women that are fond of the houses of other
people and that have no modesty. On the other hand, I reside with those
women that are devoted to their husbands, that are blessed in behaviour,
and that are always decked in ornaments and attired in good robes. I
always reside with those women that are truthful in speech, that are of
handsome and agreeable features, that are blessed and that are endued
with all accomplishments. I always avoid such women as are sinful and
unclean or impure, as always lick the corners of their mouths, as have no
patience or fortitude, and as are fond of dispute and quarrelling, as are
given to much sleep, and as always lie down. I always reside in
conveyances and the animals that drag them, in maidens, in ornaments and
good vestments, in sacrifices, in clouds charged with rain, in full-blown
lotuses, and in those stars that bespangle the autumnal firmament. I
reside in elephants, in the cow pen, in good seats, and in lakes adorned
with full-blown lotuses. I live also in such rivers as babble sweetly in
their course, melodious with the music of cranes, having banks adorned
with rows of diverse trees, and restored to by Brahmanas and ascetics and
others crowned with success. I always reside in those rivers also that
have deep and large volumes of rolling waters rendered turbid by lions
and elephants plunging into them for bathing or slaking their thirst. I
reside also in infuriate elephants, in bovine bulls, in kings, on the
throne and good men. I always reside in that house in which the inmate
pours libation on the sacrificial fire and worships kine, Brahmanas and
the deities. I reside in that house where at the proper time offerings
are made unto the deities, in course of worship.[29] I always reside in
such Brahmanas as are devoted to the study of the Vedas, in Kshatriyas
devoted to the observance of righteousness, in Vaisyas devoted to
cultivation, and the Sudras devoted to the (menial) service of the three
upper classes. I reside, with a heart firm and unchangeable, in Narayana,
in my embodied self. In Him is righteousness in its perfection and full
measure, devotion to the Brahmanas, and the quality of agreeableness. Can
I not say, O lady that I do not reside in my embodied form, (in any of
these places that I have mentioned, except Narayana)? That person in whom
I reside in spirit increases in righteousness and fame and wealth and
objects of desire.'"



SECTION XII

"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoveth, O king to tell me truly which of the
two viz., man or woman derives the greater pleasure from an act of union
with each other. Kindly resolve my doubt in this respect."

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited this old narrative of the
discourse between Bhangaswana and Sakra as a precedent illustrating the
question. In days of yore there lived a king of the name of Bhangaswana.
He was exceedingly righteous and was known as a royal sage. He was,
however, childless, O chief of man, and therefore performed a sacrifice
from desire of obtaining an issue. The sacrifice which that mighty
monarch performed was the Agnishtuta. In consequence of the fact that the
deity of fire is alone adored in that sacrifice, this is always disliked
by Indra. Yet it is the sacrifice that is desired by men when for the
purpose of obtaining an issue they seek to cleanse themselves of their
sins.[30] The highly blessed chief of the celestials, viz. Indra,
learning that the monarch was desirous of performing the Agnishtuta,
began from that moment to look for the laches of that royal sage of
well-restrained soul (for if he could succeed in finding some laches, he
could then punish his disregarder). Notwithstanding all his vigilance,
however, O king, Indra failed to detect any laches, on the part of the
high-souled monarch. Some time after, one day, the king went on a hunting
expedition. Saying unto himself--This, indeed, is an opportunity,--Indra
stupefied the monarch. The king proceeded alone on his horse, confounded
because of the chief of the celestials having stupefied his senses.
Afflicted with hunger and thirst, the king's confusion was so great that
he could not ascertain the points of the compass. Indeed, afflicted with
thirst, he began to wander hither and thither. He then beheld a lake that
was exceedingly beautiful and was full of transparent water. Alighting
from his steed, and plunging into the lake, he caused his animal to
drink. Tying his horse then, whose thirst had been slaked, to a tree, the
king plunged into the lake again for performing his ablutions. To his
amazement he found that he was changed, by virtue of the waters, into a
woman. Beholding himself thus transformed in respect of sex itself, the
king became overpowered with shame. With his senses and mind completely
agitated, he began to reflect with his whole heart in this strain:--Alas,
how shall I ride my steed? How shall I return to my capital? In
consequence of the Agnishtuta sacrifice I have got a hundred sons all
endued with great might, and all children of my own loins. Alas, thus
transformed, what shall I say unto them? What shall I say unto my
spouses, my relatives and well-wishers, and my subjects of the city and
the provinces? Rishis conversant with the truths of duty and religion and
other matters say that mildness and softness and liability to extreme
agitation are the attributes of women, and that activity, hardness, and
energy are the attributes of men. Alas, my manliness has disappeared. For
what reason has femininity come over me? In consequence of this
transformation of sex, how shall I succeed in mounting my horse
again?--Having indulged in these sad thoughts, the monarch, with great
exertion, mounted his steed and came back to his capital, transformed
though he had been into a woman. His sons and spouses and servants, and
his subjects of the city and the provinces, beholding that extraordinary
transformation, became exceedingly amazed. Then that royal sage, that
foremost of eloquent men, addressing them all, said,--I had gone out on a
hunting expedition, accompanied by a large force. Losing all knowledge of
the points of the compass, I entered a thick and terrible forest,
impelled by the fates. In that terrible forest, I became afflicted with
thirst and lost my senses. I then beheld a beautiful lake abounding with
fowl of every description. Plunging into that stream for performing my
ablutions, I was transformed into a woman!--Summoning then his spouses
and counsellors, and all his sons by their names, that best of monarchs
transformed into a woman said unto them these words:--Do ye enjoy this
kingdom in happiness. As regards myself, I shall repair to the woods, ye
sons.--Having said so unto his children, the monarch proceeded to the
forest. Arrived there, she came upon an asylum inhabited by an ascetic.
By that ascetic the transformed monarch gave birth to a century of sons.
Taking all those children of hers, she repaired to where her former
children were, and addressing the latter, said,--Ye are the children of
my loins while I was a man. These are my children brought forth by me in
this state of transformation. Ye sons, do ye all enjoy my kingdom
together, like brothers born of the same parents.--At this command of
their parent, all the brothers, uniting together, began to enjoy the
kingdom as their joint property. Beholding those children of the king all
jointly enjoying the kingdom as brothers born of the same parents, the
chief of the celestials, filled with wrath, began to reflect--By
transforming this royal sage into a woman I have, it seems, done him good
instead of an injury. Saying this, the chief of the celestials viz.,
Indra of a hundred sacrifices, assuming the form of a Brahmana, repaired
to the capital of the king and meeting all the children succeeded in
disuniting the princes. He said unto them--Brothers never remain at peace
even when they happen to be the children of the same father. The sons of
the sage Kasyapa, viz., the deities and the Asuras, quarrelled with each
other on account of the sovereignty of the three worlds. As regards ye
princes, ye are the children of the royal sage Bhangaswana. These others
are the children of an ascetic. The deities and the Asuras are children
of even one common sire, and yet the latter quarrelled with each other.
How much more, therefore, should you quarrel with each other? This
kingdom that is your paternal property is being enjoyed by these children
of an ascetic. With these words, Indra succeeded in causing a breach
between them, so that they were very soon engaged in battle and slew each
other. Hearing this, king Bhangaswana, who was living as an ascetic
woman, burnt with grief and poured forth her lamentations. The lord of
the celestials viz. Indra, assuming the guise of a Brahmana, came to that
spot where the ascetic lady was living and meeting her, said,--O thou
that art possessed of a beautiful face, with what grief dost thou burn so
that thou art pouring forth thy lamentations?--Beholding the Brahmana the
lady told him in a piteous voice,--Two hundred sons of mine O regenerate
one, have been slain by Time. I was formerly a king, O learned Brahmana
and in that state had a hundred sons. These were begotten by me after my
own form, O best of regenerate persons. On one occasion I went on a
hunting expedition. Stupefied, I wandered amidst a thick forest.
Beholding at last a lake, I plunged into it. Rising, O foremost of
Brahmanas, I found that I had become a woman. Returning to my capital I
installed my sons in the sovereignty of my dominions and then departed
for the forest. Transformed into a woman, I bore a hundred sons to my
husband who is a high souled ascetic. All of them were born in the
ascetic's retreat. I took them to the capital. My children, through the
influence of Time, quarrelled with each other, O twice-born one. Thus
afflicted by Destiny, I am indulging in grief. Indra addressed him in
these harsh words.--In former days, O lady, thou gayest me great pain,
for thou didst perform a sacrifice that is disliked by Indra. Indeed,
though I was present, thou didst not invoke me with honours. I am that
Indra, O thou of wicked understanding. It is I with whom thou hast
purposely sought hostilities. Beholding Indra, the royal sage fell at his
feet, touching them with his head, and said,--Be gratified with me, O
foremost of deities. The sacrifice of which thou speakest was performed
from desire of offspring (and not from any wish to hurt thee). It
behoveth thee therefore, to grant me thy pardon.--Indra, seeing the
transformed monarch prostrate himself thus unto him, became gratified
with him and desired to give him a boon. Which of your sons, O king, dost
thou wish, should revive, those that were brought forth by thee
transformed into a woman, or those that were begotten by thee in thy
condition as a person of the male sex? The ascetic lady, joining her
hands, answered Indra, saying, O Vasava, let those sons of mine come to
life that were borne by me as a woman. Filled with wonder at this reply,
Indra once more asked the lady, Why dost thou entertain less affection
for those children of thine that were begotten by thee in thy form of a
person of the male sex? Why is it that thou bearest greater affection for
those children that were borne by thee in thy transformed state? I wish
to hear the reason of this difference in respect of thy affection. It
behoveth thee to tell me everything.'

"The lady said, 'The affection that is entertained by a woman is much
greater than that which is entertained by a man. Hence, it is, O Sakra,
that I wish those children to come back to life that were borne by me as
a woman.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, Indra became highly pleased and said
unto her, O lady that art so truthful, let all thy children come back
into life. Do thou take another boon, O foremost of kings, in fact,
whatever boon thou likest. O thou of excellent vows, do thou take from me
whatever status thou choosest, that of woman or of man.'

"The lady said, 'I desire to remain a woman, O Sakra. In fact,--do not
wish to be restored to the status of manhood, O Vasava.--Hearing this
answer, Indra once more asked her, saying,--Why is it, O puissant one,
that abandoning the status of manhood thou wishest that of womanhood?
Questioned thus, that foremost of monarchs transformed into a woman
answered, 'In acts of congress, the pleasure that women enjoy is always
much greater than what is enjoyed by men. It is for this reason, O Sakra,
that I desire to continue a woman; O foremost of the deities, truly do I
say unto thee that I derive greater pleasure in my present status of
womanhood. I am quite content with this status of womanhood that I now
have. Do thou leave me now, O lord of heaven.--Hearing these words of
hers, the lord of the celestials answered,--So be it,--and bidding her
farewell, proceeded to heaven. Thus, O monarch, it is known that woman
derives much greater pleasure than man under the circumstances thou hast
asked.'"



SECTION XIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'What should a man do in order to pass pleasantly
through this and the other world. How, indeed, should one conduct
oneself? What practices should one adopt with this end in view?'

"Bhishma said, 'One should avoid the three acts that are done with the
body, the four that are done with speech, the three that are done with
the mind, and the ten paths of action. The three acts that are done with
the body and should be wholly avoided are the destruction of the lives of
other creatures, theft or appropriation of what belongs to other persons,
and the enjoyment of other people's wives. The four acts that are done
with speech, O king, and that should never be indulged in or even thought
of, are evil conversation, harsh words, publishing other people's faults,
and falsehood. Coveting the possessions of others, doing injury to
others, and disbelief in the ordinances of the Vedas, are the three acts
done with the mind which should always be avoided.[31] Hence, one should
never do any evil act in word, body, or mind. By doing good and evil
acts, one is sure to enjoy or endure the just consequences thereof.
Nothing can be more certain than this.'"



SECTION XIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'O son of the River Ganga, thou hast heard all the
names of Maheshwara, the Lord of the universe. Do thou tell us, O
grandsire, all the names that are applied, O puissant one, unto Him who
is called Isa and Sambhu. Do thou tell us all those names that are
applied unto Him who is called Vabhru or vast, Him that has the universe
for his form, Him that is the illustrious preceptor of all the deities
and the Asuras, that is called Swayambhu (self-creating) and that is the
cause of the origin and dissolution of the universe. Do thou tell us also
of the puissance of Mahadeva.'

"Bhishma said, 'I am quite incompetent to recite the virtues of Mahadeva
of highest intelligence. He pervades all things in the universe and yet
is not seen anywhere. He is the creator of universal self and the Pragna
(knowing) self and he is their master. All the deities, from Brahman to
the Pisachas, adore and worship him. He transcends both Prakriti and
Purusha. It is of Him that Rishis, conversant with Yoga and possessing a
knowledge of the tattwas, think and reflect. He is indestructible and
Supreme Brahman. He is both existent and non-existent. Agitating both
Prakriti and Purusha by means of His energy, He created therefrom the
universal lord of creatures, viz., Brahma. Who is there that is competent
to tell the virtues of that god of gods, that is endued with supreme
Intelligence? Man is subject to conception (in the mother's womb), birth,
decrepitude, and death. Being such, what man like me is competent to
understand Bhava? Only Narayana, O son, that bearer of the discus and the
mace, can comprehend Mahadeva. He is without deterioration. He is the
foremost of all beings in attributes. He is Vishnu, because of his
pervading the universe. He is irresistible. Endued with spiritual vision,
He is possessed of supreme Energy. He sees all things with the eye of
Yoga. It is in consequence of the devotion of the high-souled Krishna to
the illustrious Rudra whom he gratified. O Bharata, in the retreat of
Vadari, by penances, that he has succeeded in pervading the entire
universe. O king of kings, it is through Maheswara of celestial vision
that Vasudeva has obtained the attribute of universal agreeableness,--an
agreeableness that is much greater than what is possessed by all articles
included under the name of wealth.[32] For a full thousand years this
Madhava underwent the austerest penances and at last succeeded in
gratifying the illustrious and boon giving Siva, that Master of all the
mobile and the immobile universe. In every new Yuga has Krishna (by such
penances) gratified Mahadeva. In every Yuga has Mahadeva been gratified
with the great devotion of the high-souled Krishna. How great is the
puissance of the high-souled Mahadeva,--that original cause of the
universe,--has been seen with his own eyes by Hari who himself transcends
all deterioration, on the occasion of his penances in the retreat of
Vadari undergone for obtaining a son.[33] I do not, O Bharata, behold any
one that is superior to Mahadeva. To expound the names of that god of
gods fully and without creating the desire of hearing more only Krishna
is competent. This mighty-armed one of Yadu's race is alone competent to
tell the attributes of the illustrious Siva. Verily, O king, only he is
able to discourse on the puissance, in its entirety of the Supreme deity?'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words, the illustrious
Bhishma, the grandsire of the Kurus, addressing Vasudeva, said the
following words, dealing with the subject of the greatness of Bhava, O
monarch.

"Bhishma said, 'Thou art the Master of all the deities and the Asuras.
Thou art illustrious. Thou art Vishnu in consequence of thy pervading the
whole universe. It behoveth thee to discourse on those subjects connected
with Siva of universal form about which Yudhishthira has asked me. In
days of yore, the Rishi Tandin, sprung from Brahma, recited in Brahma's
region and before Brahma himself the thousand names of Mahadeva. Do thou
recite those names before this conclave so that these Rishis endued with
wealth of asceticism, observant of high vows, possessed of
self-restraint, and numbering the Island-born Krishna among them, may
hear thee. Do thou discourse on the high blessedness of Him who is
immutable, who is always cheerful and happy, who is Hotri, who is the
universal Protector, who is Creator, of the universe, and who is called
Mundin and Kaparddin.'[34]

"Vasudeva said, 'The very deities with Indra, and the Grandsire Brahma
numbering among them, and the great Rishis also, are incompetent to
understand the course of Mahadeva's acts truly and in all their details.
Even He is the end which all righteous people attain. The very Adityas
who are endued with subtile sight, are unable to behold his abode. How
then can one that is merely a man succeed in comprehending Him?[35] I
shall, therefore, truly recite to you some of the attributes of that
illustrious slayer of Asuras, who is regarded as the Lord of all
sacrifices and vows.

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words, the illustrious
Vasudeva began his discourse on the attributes of the high-souled
Mahadeva endued with the highest intelligence, after having purified
himself by touching water."

"Vasudeva said, 'Hear, ye foremost of Brahmana's and thou Yudhishthira
also, O sire, and hear thou too, O Ganga's son, the names that are
applied unto Kaparddin. Hear ye, how in former days, I obtained a sight,
so difficult to obtain, (of that great god), for the sake of Samva.
Verily, in those days was the illustrious deity seen by me in consequence
of Yoga-abstraction.[36] After twelve years had expired from the time
when Pradyumna, the son of Rukmini, who is endued with great
intelligence, slew the Asura Samvara in days of yore, my spouse Jamvavati
addressed me. Indeed, beholding Pradyumna and Charudeshna and other sons
born of Rukmini, Jamvavati, desirous of a son, said these words unto me,
O Yudhishthira,--Grant me, O thou of unfading glory, a son endued with
heroism, the foremost of mighty men, possessed of the most agreeable
features, sinless in conduct, and like unto thyself. And O, let there be
no delay on thy part in granting this prayer of mine. There is nothing in
the three worlds that is unattainable by thee, O perpetuator of Yadu's
race, thou canst create other worlds if only thou wishest it. Observing a
vow for twelve years and purifying thyself, thou hadst adored the Lord of
all creatures (viz., Mahadeva) and then begot upon Rukmini the sons that
she has obtained from thee, viz., Charudeshna and Sucharu and Charuvesa
and Yasodhana and Charusravas and Charuyasas and Pradyumna and Sambhu. O
slayer of Madhu, do thou grant to me a son like unto those of great
powers whom thou hast begotten upon Rukmini?--Thus addressed by the
princess, I replied unto her of slender waist,--Let me have thy
permission (to leave thee for some time), O queen. I shall certainly obey
thy behest. She answered me, saying,--Go, and may success and prosperity
always attend thee. Let Brahma and Siva and Kasyapa, the Rivers, those
deities that preside over the mind, the soil, all deciduous herbs, those
Chhandas (Rhymes) that are regarded as bearers of the libations poured in
sacrifices, the Rishis, Earth, the Oceans, the sacrificial presents,
those syllables that are uttered for completing the cadences of Samans,
the Rikshas, the Pitris, the Planets, the spouses of the deities, the
celestial maidens, the celestial mothers, the great cycles, kine,
Chandramas, Savitri, Agni, Savitri, the knowledge of the Vedas, the
seasons, the year, small and big divisions of time, e.g., the Kshanas,
the Labas, the Muhurtas, the Nimeshas, and the Yugas in succession,
protect thee, O Yadava, and keep thee in happiness, wherever thou mayst
stay. Let no danger overtake thee on thy way, and let no heedlessness be
thine, O sinless one.--Thus blessed by her, I took her leave, bidding
farewell unto the daughter of the prince of apes. Repairing then into the
presence of that foremost of men, viz., my father, of my mother, of the
king, and of Ahuka, I informed them of what the daughter of the prince of
the Vidyadharas, in great affliction, had said unto me. Bidding them
farewell with a sorrowful heart, I then repaired to Gada and to Rama of
great might. These two cheerfully addressed me saying,--Let thy penances
increase without any obstruction.--Having obtained the permission of all
of them, I thought of Garuda. He immediately came to me and bore me to
Himavat (at my bidding). Arrived at Himavat, I dismissed him. There on
that foremost of mountains, I beheld many wonderful sights. I saw an
excellent, wonderful, and agreeable retreat for the practice of penances.
That delightful retreat was owned by the high-souled Upamanyu who was a
descendant of Vyaghrapada. That retreat is applauded and reverenced by
the deities and the Gandharvas, and seemed to be covered with Vedic
beauty. It was adorned with Dhavas and Kakubhas and Kadamvas and Cocas,
with Kuruvakas and Ketakas and Jamvus and Patalas, with banians and
Varunakas and Vatsanabhas and Vilwas, with Saralas and Kapitthas and
Piyalas and Salas and palmyras with Vadaris and Kundas and Punnagas and
Asokas and Amras and Kovidaras and Champakas and Panasas, and with
diverse other trees endued with fruits and flowers. And that retreat was
also decked with the straight stems of the Musa Supienta.[37] Truly, that
asylum was adorned with diverse other kinds of trees and with diverse
kinds of fruits forming the food of diverse kinds of birds. Heaps of
ashes (of sacrificial fires) were thrown in proper places all around,
which added to the beauty of the scene. It abounded with Rurus and apes
and tigers and lions and leopards, with deer of diverse species and
peacocks, and with cats and snakes. Indeed, large numbers of other
animals also were seen there, as also buffaloes and bears. Delicious
breezes constantly blew bearing the melodious strains of celestial
nymphs. The babblings of mountain rivulets and springs, the sweet notes
of winged choristers, the gruntings of elephants, the delicious stains of
Kinnaras, and the auspicious voice of ascetics singing the Samans, O
hero, and diverse other kinds of music, rendered that retreat extremely
charming. The very imagination cannot conceive another retreat as
delightful as the one I beheld. There were also large houses in that
asylum, intended for keeping the sacred fire, and covered all over with
flowering creepers. It was adorned with the river Ganga of clear and
sacred water. Indeed, the daughter of Jahnu always remained there. It was
decked also with many ascetics who were the foremost of all righteous
persons, who were endued with high souls, and who resembled fire itself
in energy.[38] Some of those ascetics subsisted upon air and some upon
water, some were devoted to Japa or the silent recitation of sacred
Mantras, and some were engaged in cleansing their souls by practising the
virtues of compassion while some amongst them were Yogins devoted to the
abstraction of Yoga-meditation. Some amongst them subsisted upon smoke
only, and some subsisted upon fire, and some upon milk. Thus was that
retreat adorned with many foremost of regenerate persons. And some there
were amongst them that had taken the vow of eating and drinking like
kine,--that is, by giving up the use of the hands at once. And some used
only two pieces of stone for husking their grain, and some used their
teeth only for that purpose. And some subsisted by drinking only the rays
of the moon, and some by drinking only froth. And some had betaken
themselves to vow of living like deer.[39] And some there were that lived
upon the fruits of the Ficus religiosa, and some that used to live upon
water. And some dressed themselves in rags and some in animal skins and
some in barks of trees. Indeed, I beheld diverse ascetics of the foremost
order observing these and other painful vows. I desired then to enter
that asylum. Verily, that asylum was honoured and adored by the deities
and all high-souled beings, by Siva and others, O Bharata, and by all
creatures of righteous acts. Thus addressed, it stood in all its beauty
on the breast of Himavat, like the lunar disc in the firmament. The
mongoose sported there with the snake, and the tiger with the deer, like
friends, forgetting their natural enmity, in consequence of the energy of
those ascetics of blazing penances and for their proximity to these
high-souled ones. In that foremost of asylums, which was delightful to
all creatures, inhabited by many foremost of Brahmanas fully conversant
with the Vedas and their branches, and by many high-souled Rishis
celebrated for the difficult vows they observed, I saw, as soon as I
entered, a puissant Rishi with matted locks on head and dressed in rags,
who seemed to blaze forth like fire with his penances and energy. Waited
upon by his disciples and possessed of tranquil soul, that foremost of
Brahmanas was young in aspect. His name was Upamanyu. Unto me who bowed
unto him with a nod of the head, he said,--Welcome art thou, O thou of
eyes like lotus petals. Today, by this visit of thine, we see that our
penances have borne fruit. Thou art worthy of our adoration, but thou
adorest us still. Thou art worthy of being seen, but thou desirest to see
me.--Joining my hands I addressed him the usual enquiries respecting the
well-being of the animals and birds that resided in his asylum, of the
progress of his righteousness, and of his disciples. The illustrious
Upamanyu then addressed me in words that were exceedingly sweet and
delightful,--Thou shalt, O Krishna, obtain without doubt a son like unto
thyself. Betaking thyself to severe penances, do thou gratify Isana, the
Lord of all creatures. That divine Master, O Adhokshaja, sporteth here
with his spouse by his side. O Janarddana, it was here that the deities
with all the Rishis, in days of yore, gratified that foremost of deities
by their penances and Brahmacharyya and truth and self-restraint, and
succeeded in obtaining the fruition of many high desires. That
illustrious god is verily the vast receptacle of all energies and
penances. Projecting into existence and withdrawing once more unto
himself all things fraught with good and evil, that inconceivable Deity
whom thou seekest, O destroyer of foes, lives here with his spouse. He
who took his birth as the Danava named Hiranyakashipu, whose strength was
so great that he could shake the very mountains of Meru, succeeded in
obtaining from Mahadeva the puissance belonging to all the deities and
enjoyed it for ten millions of years. He who was the foremost of all his
sons and who was celebrated by the name of Mandara, succeeded, through
the boon he had obtained from Mahadeva, in fighting Sakra for a million
of years. The terrible discus of Vishnu and the thunderbolt of Indra were
both unable to make the slightest impression, O Kesava, in days of yore,
upon the body of that great cause of universal affliction.[40] The discus
which thou bearest, O sinless one, was given unto thee by Mahadeva after
he had slain a Daitya that was proud of his strength and used to live
within the waters. That discus, blazing with energy and like unto fire,
was created by the great god having for his device the bull. Wonderful
and irresistible in energy it was given unto thee by that illustrious
god. In consequence of its blazing energy it was incapable of being gazed
at by any person save Siva the wielder of Pinaka. It was for this reason
that Bhava (Siva) bestowed upon it the name of Sudarsana. From that time
the name Sudarsana came to be current in all the worlds. Even the weapon,
O Kesava, failed to make the slightest impression on the body of
Hiranyakashipu's son Mandara, that appeared like an evil planet in the
three worlds. Hundreds of Chakras like thine and thunderbolts like that
of Sakra, could not inflict a scratch on the body of that evil planet
endued with great might, who had obtained a boon from Mahadeva. Afflicted
by the mighty Mandara, the deities fought hard against him and his
associates, all of whom had obtained boons from Mahadeva. Gratified with
another Danava named Vidyutprabha, Mahadeva granted to him the
sovereignty of the three worlds. That Danava remained the sovereign of
the three worlds for a hundred thousand years. And Mahadeva said unto
him,--Thou shalt become one of my attendants.--Indeed, the puissant Lord
further bestowed upon him the boon of a hundred millions of children. The
Master without birth, of all creatures further gave the Danava the region
known by the name of Kusadwipa for his kingdom. Another great Asura, of
the name of Satamukha, was created by Brahma. For a hundred years he
poured on' the sacrificial fire (as offerings unto Mahadeva) the flesh of
his own body. Gratified with such penances, Sankara said unto him,--What
can I do for thee?--Satamukha replied unto him, saying,--O thou that art
most wonderful, let me have the power of creating new creatures and
animals. Give also unto me, O foremost of all deities, eternal
power.--The puissant lord, thus addressed by him, said unto him,--So be
it.--The Self-born Brahma, concentrating his mind in Yoga,[41] in days of
yore, made a sacrifice for three hundred years, with the object of
obtaining children. Mahadeva granted him a thousand sons possessed of
qualifications commensurate with the merits of the sacrifice. Without
doubt, thou knowest, O Krishna, the lord of Yoga, him that is, who is
sung by the deities. The Rishi known by the name of Yajnavalkya is
exceedingly virtuous. By adoring Mahadeva he has acquired great fame. The
great ascetic who is Parasara's son, viz., Vyasa, of soul set on Yoga,
has obtained great celebrity by adoring Sankara. The Valikhilyas were on
a former occasion disregarded by Maghavat. Filled with wrath at this,
they gratified the illustrious Rudra. That lord of the universe, that
foremost one of all the deities, thus gratified by the Valikhilyas, said
unto them,--Ye shall succeed by your penances in creating a bird that
will rob Indra of the Amrita. Through the wrath of Mahadeva on a former
occasion, all the waters disappeared. The deities gratified him by
performing a sacrifice called Saptakapala, and caused, through his grace,
other waters to flow into the worlds. Verily, when the three-eyed deity
became gratified, water once more appeared in the world. The wife of
Atri, who was conversant with the Vedas, abandoned her husband in a huff
and said,--I shall no longer live in subjection to that ascetic.--Having
said these words, she sought the protection of Mahadeva. Through fear of
her lord, Atri, passed three hundred years, abstaining from all food. And
all this time she slept on wooden clubs for the purpose of gratifying
Bhava. The great deity then appeared unto her and then smilingly
addressed her, saying--Thou shalt obtain a son. And thou shalt get that
son without the need of a husband, simply through the grace of Rudra.
Without doubt that son, born in the race of his father, shall become
celebrated for his worth, and assume a name after thee. The illustrious
Vikarna also, O slayer of Madhu, full of devotion to Mahadeva, gratified
him with severe penances and obtained high and happy success. Sakalya,
too, of restrained soul, adored Bhava in a mental sacrifice that he
performed for nine hundred years, O Kesava. Gratified with him the
illustrious deity said unto him,--Thou shalt become a great author. O
son, inexhaustible shall thy fame be in the three worlds. Thy race also
shall never come to an end and shall be adorned by many great Rishis that
shall take birth in it. Thy son will become the foremost of Brahmanas and
will make the Sutras of thy work. There was a celebrated Rishi of the
name of Savarni in the Krita age. Here, in this asylum, he underwent
severe penances for six thousand years. The illustrious Rudra said,--I am
gratified with thee, O sinless one! Without being subject to decrepitude
or death, thou shalt become an author celebrated through all the
worlds!--In days of yore, Sakra, also, in Baranasi, filled with devotion,
O Janarddana, adored Mahadeva who has empty space alone for his garments
and who is smeared with ashes as an agreeable unguent. Having adored
Mahadeva thus, he obtained the sovereignty of the celestials. Narada
also, in days of yore, adored the great Bhava with devotion of heart.
Gratified with him, Mahadeva, that preceptor of the celestial preceptor,
said these words.--No one shall be thy equal in energy and penances. Thou
shalt always attend upon me with thy songs and instrumental music. Hear
also, O Madhava, how in former times I succeeded in obtaining a sight of
that god of gods, that Master of all creatures, O Lord. Hear also in
detail for what object, O thou of great puissance. I invoked with
restrained senses and mind that illustrious deity endued with supreme
energy. I shall, O sinless one, tell thee with full details all that I
succeeded in obtaining from that god of gods, viz., Maheswara. In ancient
times, viz., Krita age, O son, there was a Rishi of great fame, named
Vyaghrapada. He was celebrated for his knowledge and mastery over the
Vedas and their branches. I was born as the son of that Rishi and Dhaumya
took birth as my younger brother. On a certain occasion, Madhava,
accompanied by Dhaumya, I came upon the asylum of certain Rishis of
cleansed souls. There I beheld a cow that was being milked. I saw the
milk and it appeared to me to resemble Amrita itself in taste. I then
came home, and impelled by childishness, I addressed my mother and
said,--Give me some food prepared with milk.--There was no milk in the
house, and accordingly my mother was much grieved at my asking for it. My
mother took a piece of (rice) cake and boiled it in water, Madhava. The
water became whitened and my mother placed it before us saying that it
was milk and bade us drink it. I had before that drunk milk on one
occasion, for my father had, at the time of a sacrifice, taken me to the
residence of some of our great kinsmen. A celestial cow, who delights the
deities, was being milked on that occasion. Drinking her milk that
resembled Amrita in taste, I knew what the virtues are of milk. I
therefore, at once understood the origin of the substance that my mother
offered me, telling me that it was milk. Verily, the taste of that cake,
O son, did not afford me any pleasure whatever. Impelled by childishness
I then addressed mother, saying,--This O mother, that thou hast given me
is not any preparation of milk.--Filled with grief and sorrow at this,
and embracing me from parental affection and smelling my head, O Madhava,
she said unto me,--Whence, O child, can ascetics of cleansed souls obtain
food prepared with milk? Such men always reside in the forest and subsist
upon bulbs and roots and fruits. Whence shall we who live by the banks of
rivers that are the resort of the Valikhilyas, we who have mountains and
forest, for our home,--whence, indeed, O child, shall we obtain milk? We,
dear child, live (sometimes) on air and sometimes on water. We dwell in
asylums in the midst of forests and woods. We habitually abstain from all
kinds of food that are taken by persons living in villages and towns. We
are accustomed to only such food as is supplied by the produce of the
wilderness. There cannot be any milk, O child, in the wilderness where
there are no offspring of Surabhi.[42] Dwelling on the banks of rivers or
in caves or on mountain-breasts, or in tirthas and other places of the
kind, we pass our time in the practice of penances and the recitation of
sacred Mantras, Siva being our highest refuge. Without gratifying the
boon-giving Sthanu of unfading glory,--him, that is, who has three
eyes,--whence, O child, can one obtain food prepared with milk and good
robes and other objects of enjoyment in the world? Do thou devote
thyself, O dear son, to Sankara with thy whole soul. Through his grace, O
child, thou art sure to obtain all such objects as administer to the
indulgence of all thy wishes,--Hearing these words of my mother, O slayer
of foes, that day, I joined my hands in reverence and bowing unto her,
said,--O mother, who this Mahadeva? In what manner can one gratify him?
Where does that god reside? How may he be seen? With what does he become
pleased? What also is the form of Sarva? How may one succeed in obtaining
a knowledge of him? If gratified, will he, O mother, show himself unto
me?--After I had said these words, O Krishna, to my mother, she, filled
with parental affection, smelt my head, O Govinda, her eyes covered with
tears the while. Gently patting my body, O slayer of Madhu, my mother,
adopting a tone of great humility, addressed me in the following words, O
best of the deities.'

"My mother said, 'Mahadeva is exceedingly difficult to be known by
persons of uncleansed souls. These men are incapable of bearing him in
their hearts of comprehending him at all. They can retain him in their
minds. They cannot seize him, nor can they obtain a sight of him. Men of
wisdom aver that his forms are many. Many, again, are the places in which
he resides. Many are the forms of his Grace. Who is there that can
understand in their details the acts, which are all excellent, of Isa, or
of all the forms that he has assumed in days of yore? Who can relate how
Sarva sports and how he becomes gratified? Maheswara of universal form
resides in the hearts of all creatures. While Munis discoursed on the
auspicious and excellent acts of Isana, I have heard from them how,
impelled by compassion towards his worshippers, he grants them a sight of
his person. For the purpose of showing a favour unto the Brahmanas, the
denizens of heaven have recited for their information the diverse forms
that were assumed by Mahadeva in days of yore. Thou hast asked me about
these. I shall recite them to thee, O son.'

"My mother continued, 'Bhava assumes the forms of Brahma and Vishnu and
the chief of the celestials of the Rudras, the Adityas, and the Aswins;
and of those deities that are called Viswadevas. He assumes the forms
also of men and women, of Pretas and Pisachas, of Kiratas and Savaras,
and of all aquatic animals. That illustrious deity assumes the forms of
also those Savaras that dwell in the woods and forests. He assumes the
forms of tortoises and fishes and conches. He it is that assumes the
forms of those coral sprouts that are used as ornaments by men. He
assumes also the forms of Yakshas, Rakshasas and Snakes, of Daityas and
Danavas. Indeed, the illustrious god assumes the forms of all creatures
too that live in holes. He assumes the forms of tigers and lions and
deer, of wolves and bears and birds, of owls and of jackals as well. He
it is that assumes the forms of swans and crows and peacocks, of
chameleons and lizards and storks. He it is that assumes the forms of
cranes and vultures and Chakravakas. Verily, he it is that assumes the
forms of Chasas and of mountains also. O son, it is Mahadeva that assumes
the forms of kine and elephants and horses and camels and asses. He
assumes also the forms of goats and leopards and diverse other varieties
of animals. It is Bhava who assumes the forms of diverse kinds of birds
of beautiful plumage. It is Mahadeva who bears the forms of persons with
sticks and those with umbrellas and those with calabashes among
Brahmanas.[43] He sometimes becomes six-faced and sometimes becomes
multifaced. He sometimes assumes forms having three eyes and forms having
many heads. And he sometimes assumes forms having many millions of legs
and forms having innumerable stomachs and faces and forms endued with
innumerable arms and innumerable sides. He sometimes appears surrounded
by innumerable spirits and ghosts. He it is that assumes the forms of
Rishis and Gandharvas, and of Siddhas and Charanas. He sometimes assumes
a form that is rendered white with the ashes he smears on it and is
adorned with a half-moon on the forehead. Adored with diverse hymns
uttered with diverse kinds of voice and worshipped with diverse Mantras
fraught with encomiums, he, that is sometimes called Sarva, is the
Destroyer of all creatures in the universe, and it is upon him, again,
that all creatures rest as on their common foundation. Mahadeva is the
soul of all creatures. He pervades all things. He is the speaker of all
discourses (on duties and rituals). He resides everywhere and should be
known as dwelling in the hearts of all creatures in the universe. He
knows the desire cherished by every one of his worshippers. He becomes
acquainted with the object in which one pays him adorations. Do thou
then, if it pleases thee, seek the protection of the chief of the
deities. He sometimes rejoices, and sometimes yields to wrath, and
sometimes utters the syllable Hum with a very loud noise. He sometimes
arms himself with the discus, sometimes with the trident, sometimes with
the mace, sometimes with the heavy mullets, sometimes with the scimitar,
and sometimes with the battle axe. He it is that assumes the form of
Sesha who sustains the world on his head. He has snakes for his belt, and
his ears are adorned with ear-rings made of snakes. Snakes form also the
sacred thread he wears. An elephant skin forms his upper garment.[44] He
sometimes laughs and sometimes sings and sometimes dances most
beautifully. Surrounded by innumerable spirits and ghosts, he sometimes
plays on musical instruments. Diverse, again are the instruments upon
which he plays, and sweet the sounds they yield. He sometimes wanders
(over crematoria), sometimes yawns, sometimes cries, and sometimes causes
others to cry. He sometimes assumes the guise of one that is mad, and
sometimes of one that is intoxicated, and he sometimes utters words that
are exceedingly sweet. Endued with appalling fierceness, he sometimes
laughs loudly, frightening all creatures with his eyes. He sometimes
sleeps and sometimes remains awake and sometimes yawns as he pleases. He
sometimes recites sacred Mantras and sometimes becomes the deity of those
Mantras which are recited. He sometimes performs penances and sometimes
becomes the deity for whose adoration those penances are undergone. He
sometimes makes gifts and sometimes receives those gifts; sometimes
disposes himself in Yoga and sometimes becomes the object of the Yoga
contemplation of others. He may be seen on the sacrificial platform or in
the sacrificial stake; in the midst of the cow-pen or in the fire. He may
not again be seen there. He may be seen as a boy or as an old man. He
sports with the daughters and the spouses of the Rishis. His hair is long
and stands erect. He is perfectly naked, for he has the horizon for his
garments. He is endued with terrible eyes. He is fair, he is darkish, he
is dark, he is pale, he is of the colour of smoke, and he is red. He is
possessed of eyes that are large and terrible. He has empty space for his
covering and he it is that covers all things. Who is there that can truly
understand the limits of Mahadeva who is formless, who is one and
indivisible, who conjures of illusions, who is of the cause of all
actions and destructive operations in the universe, who assumes the form
of Hiranyagarbha, and who is without beginning and without end, and who
is without birth.[45] He lives in the heart (of every creature). He is
the prana, he is the mind, and he is Jiva (that is invested in the
material case). He is the soul of Yoga, and it is that is called Yoga. He
is the Yoga-contemplation into which Yogins enter.[46] He is the Supreme
Soul. Indeed Maheswara, the purity in essence, is capable of being
comprehended not by the senses but through only the Soul seizing his
existence. He plays on diverse musical instruments. He is a vocalist. He
has a hundred thousand eyes, he has one mouth, he has two mouths, he has
three mouths, and he has many mouths. Devoting thyself to him, setting
thy heart upon him, depending upon him, and accepting him as thy one
refuse, do thou, O son, adore Mahadeva and then mayst thou obtain the
fruition of all thy wishes. Hearing those words of my mother, O slayer of
foes, from that day my devotion was directed to Mahadeva, having nothing
else for its object. I then applied myself to the practice of the
austerest penances for gratifying Sankara. For one thousand years I stood
on my left toe. After that I passed one thousand years, subsisting only
upon fruits. The next one thousand years I passed, subsisting upon the
fallen leaves of trees. The next thousand years I passed, subsisting upon
water only. After that I passed seven hundred years, subsisting on air
alone. In this way, I adored Mahadeva for a full thousand years of the
celestials. After this, the puissant Mahadeva, the Master of all the
universe, became gratified with me. Desirous of ascertaining whether I
was solely devoted to him and him alone, he appeared before me in the
form of Sakra surrounded by all the deities. As the celebrated Sakra, he
had a thousand eyes on his person and was armed with the thunderbolt. And
he rode on an elephant whose complexion was of the purest white, with
eyes red, ears folded, the temporal juice trickling down his cheeks, with
trunk contracted, terrible to look at, and endued with four tusks.
Indeed, riding on such an elephant, the illustrious chief of the deities
seemed to blaze forth with his energy. With a beautiful crown on his head
and adorned with garlands round his neck and bracelets round his arms, he
approached the spot where I was. A white umbrella was held over his head.
And he was waited upon by many Apsaras, and many Gandharvas sang his
praise. Addressing me, he said,--O foremost of regenerate persons, I have
been gratified with thee. Beg of me whatever boon thou desirest,--Hearing
these words of Sakra I did not become glad. Verily, O Krishna, I answered
the chief of the celestials in these words.--I do not desire any boon at
thy hands, or from the hands of any other deity. O amiable deity, I tell
thee truly, that it is Mahadeva only from whom I have boons to ask. True,
true it is, O Sakra, true are these words that I say unto thee. No other
words are at all agreeable to me save those which relate to Maheswara. At
the command of Pashupati, that Lord of all creatures, I am ready to
become a worm or a tree with many branches. If not obtained through the
grace represented by Mahadeva's boons, the very sovereignty of the three
worlds would not be acceptable to me. Let me be born among the very
Chandalas but let me still be devoted to the feet of Hara. Without,
again, being devoted to that Lord of all creatures, I would not like to
have birth in the palace of Indra himself. If a person be wanting in
devotion to that Lord of the universe,--that Master of the deities and
the Asuras,--his misery will not end even if from want of food he has to
subsist upon only air and water.[47] What is the need of other discourses
that are even fraught with other kinds of morality and righteousness,
unto those persons who do not like to live even a moment without thinking
of feet of Mahadeva? When the unrighteous or sinful Kali Yuga comes, one
should never pass a moment without devoting his heart upon Mahadeva. One
that has drunk the Amrita constituted by the devotion to Hara, one
becomes freed from the fear of the world. One that has not obtained the
grace of Mahadeva can never succeed to devote oneself to Mahadeva for a
single day or for half a day or for a Muhurta or for a Kshana or for a
Lava (very small unit of time). At the command of Mahadeva I shall
cheerfully become a worm or an insect, but I have no relish for even the
sovereignty of the three worlds, if bestowed by thee, O Sakra. At the
word of Hara I would become even a dog. In fact, that would accord with
my highest wish. If not given by Maheswara, I would not have the
sovereignty of the very deities. I do not wish to have this dominion of
the Heavens. I do not wish to have the sovereignty of the celestials. I
do not wish to have the region of Brahma. Indeed, I do not wish to have
that cessation of individual existence which is called Emancipation and
which involves a complete identification with Brahma. But I want to
become the slave of Hara. As long as that Lord of all creatures, the
illustrious Mahesa, with crown on his head and body possessed of the pure
white complexion of the lunar disc, does not become gratified with me, so
long shall I cheerfully bear all those afflictions, due to a hundred
repetitions of decrepitude, death and birth, that befall to the lot of
embodied beings. What person in the universe can obtain tranquillity,
without gratifying Rudra that is freed from decripitude and death, that
is endued with the effulgence of the Sun, the Moon, or the fire, that is
the root or original cause of everything real and unreal in the three
worlds, and that exists as one and indivisible entity? If in consequence
of my faults, rebirths be mine, I shall, in those new births, devote
myself solely to Bhava.'"

"Indra said, 'What reason canst thou assign for the existence of a
Supreme Being or for His being the cause of all causes?'"

"Upamanyu said, 'I solicit boons from that great Deity named Siva whom
utterers of Brahma has described as existent and non-existent, manifest
and unmanifest, eternal or immutable, one and many. I solicit boons from
Him who is without beginning and middle and end, who is Knowledge and
Puissance, who is inconceivable and who is the Supreme Soul. I solicit
boons from Him whence comes all Puissance, who has not been produced by
any one, who is immutable, and who, though himself unsprung from any
seed, is the seed of all things in the universe. I solicit boons from Him
who is blazing Effulgence, (beyond Darkness) who is the essence of all
penances, who transcends all faculties of which we are possessed and
which we may devote for the purpose of comprehending him, and by knowing
whom every one becomes freed from grief or sorrow. I worship him, O
Purandara, who is conversant with the creation of all elements and the
thought of all living creatures, and who is the original cause of the
existence or creation of all creatures, who is omnipresent, and who has
the puissance to give everything.[48] I solicit boons from Him who cannot
be comprehended by argument, who represents the object of the Sankhya and
the Yoga systems of philosophy, and who transcends all things, and whom
all persons conversant with the topics of enquiry worship and adore.[49]
I solicit boons from Him, O Maghavat, who is the soul of Maghavat
himself, who is said to be the God of the gods, and who is the Master of
all creatures. I solicit boons from Him who it is that first created
Brahma, that creator of all the worlds, having filled Space (with His
energy) and evoked into existence the primeval egg.[50] Who else than
that Supreme Lord could be creator of Fire, Water, Wind, Earth, Space,
Mind, and that which is called Mahat? Tell me, O Sakra, who else than
Siva could create Mind, Understanding, Consciousness or Ego, the
Tanmatras, and the senses? Who is there higher than Siva?[51] The wise
say that the Grandsire Brahma is the creator of this universe. Brahma,
however, acquired his high puissance and prosperity by adoring and
gratifying Mahadeva, that God of gods. That high puissance (consisting of
all the three attributes of creation, protection, and destruction), which
dwells in that illustrious Being who is endowed with the quality of being
one, who created Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, was derived from Mahadeva.
Tell me who is there that is superior to the Supreme Lord?[52] Who else
than that God of gods is competent to unite the sons of Diti with
lordship and puissance, judging by the sovereignty and the power of
oppressing conferred upon the foremost of the Daityas and Danavas?[53]
The different points of the horizon, Time, the Sun, all fiery entities,
planets, wind, water, and the stars and constellations,--these, know
thou, are from Mahadeva. Tell us who is higher than the Supreme Lord? Who
else is there, except Mahadeva, in the matter of the creation of
Sacrifice and the destruction of Tripura? Who else except Mahadeva, the
grinder of the foes, has offered lordship to the principal?[54] What
need, O Purandara, of many well-sounding statements fraught with spacious
sophisms, when I behold thee of a thousand eyes, O best of the
deities,--thee that art worshipped by Siddhas and Gandharvas and the
deities and the Rishis? O best of the Kusikas, all this is due to the
grace of that God of gods viz., Mahadeva. Know, O Kesava, that this all,
consisting of animate and inanimate existences with heaven and other
unseen entities, which occur in this world, and which has the
all-pervading Lord for their soul, has flowed from Maheswara and has been
created (by him) for enjoyment by Jiva.[55] In the worlds that are known
by the names of Bhu, Bhuva, Swah, and Maha, in the midst of the mountains
of Lokaloka, in the islands, in the mountains of Meru, in all things that
yield happiness, and in the hearts of all creatures, O illustrious
Maghavat, resides Mahadeva, as persons conversant with all the topics of
enquiry say. If, O Sakra, the Devas (deities) and the Asuras could see
any other puissant form than Bhava's, would not both of them, especially
the former, when opposed and afflicted by the latter, have sought the
protection of that form? In all hostile encounters of the deities, the
Yakshas, the Uragas and the Rakshasas, that terminating in mutual
destruction, it is Bhava that gives unto those that meet with
destruction, puissance commensurate with their respective locations as
dependent upon their acts. Tell me, who else than Maheswara is there for
bestowing boons upon, and once more chastising the Andhaka and Sukra and
Dundubhi and Maharshi and many foremost of Yakshas, Indra and Vala and
Rakshasas and the Nivatakavachas? Was not the vital seed of Mahadeva,
that Master of both the deities and the Asuras, poured as a libation upon
the fire? From that seed sprung a mountain of gold. Who else is there
whose seed can be said to be possessed of such virtue.[56] Who else in
this world is praised as having the horizon only for his garments? Who
else can be said to be a Brahmacharin with his vital seed drawn up? Who
else is there that has half his body occupied by his dear spouse?[57] Who
else is there that has been able to subjugate Kama, the god of desire?
Tell me, O Indra, what other Being possesses that high region of supreme
felicity that is applauded by all the deities? Who else has the
crematorium as his sporting ground? Who else is there that is so praised
for his dancing? Whose puissance and worship remain immutable? Who else
is there that sports with spirits and ghosts? Tell me, O deity, who else
has associate that are possessed of strength like his own and that are,
therefore, proud of that strength or puissance?[58] Who else is there
whose status is applauded as unchangeable and worshipped with reverence
by the three worlds? Who else is there that pours rain, gives heat, and
blazes forth in Energy? From whom else do we derive our wealth of herbs?
Who else upholds all kinds of wealth? Who else sports as much as he
pleases in the three worlds of mobile and immobile things? O Indra, know
Maheswara to be the original cause (of everything). He is adored by
Yogins, by Rishis, by the Gandharvas, and by the Siddhas, with the aid of
knowledge, (of ascetic) success, and of the rites laid down in the
scriptural ordinances.[59] He is adored by both the deities and the
Asuras with the aid of sacrifices by acts and the affliction of the
ritual laid down in the scriptures. The fruits of action can never touch
him for he transcends them all. Being such, I call him the original cause
of everything.[60] He is both gross and subtile. He is without compare.
He cannot be conceived by the senses. He is endued with attributes and he
is divested of them. He is the lord of attributes, for they are under his
control. Even such is the place that is Maheswara's. He is the cause of
the maintenance and the creation (of the universe). He is the cause of
the universe and the cause also of its destruction. He is the Past, the
Present, and the Future. He is the parent of all things. Verily, He is
the cause of every thing. He is that which is mutable, He is the
unmanifest, He is Knowledge; He is ignorance; He is every act, He is
every omission; He is righteousness; and He is unrighteousness. Him, O
Sakra, do I call the cause of every thing. Behold, O Indra, in the image
of Mahadeva the indications of both the sexes. That god of gods, viz.,
Rudra, that cause of both creation and destruction, displays in his form
the indications of both the sexes as the one cause of the creation of the
universe. My mother formerly told me that he is the cause of the universe
and the one cause of everything. There is no one that is higher than Isa,
O Sakra. If it pleases thee, do thou throw thyself on his kindness and
protection. Thou hast visible evidence, O chief of the celestials, of the
fact that the universe has sprung from the union of the sexes (as
represented by Mahadeva). The universe, thou knowest, is the sum of what
is vested with attributes and what else is divested of attributes and has
for its immediate cause the seeds of Brahma and others. Brahma and Indra
and Hutasana and Vishnu and all the other deities, along with the Daityas
and the Asuras, crowned with the fruition of a thousand desires, always
say that there is none that is higher than Mahadeva.[61] Impelled by
desire, I solicit, with restrained mind, that god known to all the mobile
and immobile universe,--him, that is, who has been spoken of as the best
and highest of all the gods, and who is auspiciousness itself, for
obtaining without delay that highest of all acquisitions, viz.,
Emancipation. What necessity is there of other reasons (for establishing)
what I believe? The supreme Mahadeva is the cause of all causes. We have
never heard that the deities have, at any time, adored the sign of any
other god than Mahadeva. If Maheswara be not accepted, tell me, if thou
hast ever heard of it, who else is there whose sign has been worshipped
or is being worshipped by all the deities? He whose sign is always
worshipped by Brahma, by Vishnu, by thee, O Indra, with all the other
deities, is verily the foremost of all adorable deities. Brahma has for
his sign the lotus, Vishnu has for his the discus, Indra has for his sign
the thunder-bolt. But the creatures of the world do not bear any of the
signs that distinguish these deities. On the other hand, all creatures
bear the signs that mark Mahadeva and his spouse. Hence, all creatures
must be regarded as belonging to Maheswara. All creatures of the feminine
sex, have sprung from Ulna's nature as their cause, and hence it is they
bear the mark of femininity that distinguishes Uma; while all creatures
that are masculine, having sprung from Siva, bear the masculine mark that
distinguishes Siva. That person who says that there is, in the three
worlds with their mobile and immobile creatures, any other cause than the
Supreme Lord, and that which is not marked with the mark of either
Mahadeva or his spouse should be regarded as very wretched and should not
be counted among the creatures of the universe. Every being with the mark
of the masculine sex should be known to be of Isana, while every being
with the mark of the feminine sex should be known to be of Uma. This
universe of mobile and immobile creatures is provided by two kinds of
forms (viz., male and female). It is from Mahadeva that I wish to obtain
boons. Failing in this, O Kausika, I would rather prefer dissolution
itself. Go or remain, O Sakra, as thou, O slayer of Vala, desirest. I
wish to have boons or curses from Mahadeva. No other deity shall I ever
acknowledge, nor would I have from any other deity the fruition of all my
wishes.--Having said these words unto the chief of the celestials, I
became overwhelmed with grief at the thought of Mahadeva not having been
gratified with me not withstanding my severe austerities. Within the
twinkling of an eye, however, I saw the celestial elephant I had beheld
before me transformed into a bull as white as a swan, or the Jasminum
pubescens, or a stalk of the lotus or silver, or the ocean of milk. Of
huge body, the hair of its tail was black and the hue of its eyes was
tawny like that of honey. Its horns were hard as adamant and had the
colour of gold. With their very sharp ends, whose hue was a mild red, the
bull seemed to tear the Earth. The animal was adorned all over with
ornaments made of the purest gold. Its face and hoofs and nose and ears
were exceedingly beautiful and its waist too exceedingly well-formed. Its
flanks were possessed of great beauty and its neck was very thick. Its
whole form was exceedingly agreeable and beautiful to look at. Its hump
shone with great beauty and seemed to occupy the whole of its
shoulder-joint. And it looked like the summit of a mountain of snow or
like a cliff of white clouds in the sky. Upon the back of that animal I
beheld seated the illustrious Mahadeva with his spouse Uma. Verily,
Mahadeva shone like the lord of stars while he is at his full. The fire
born of his energy resembled in effulgence the lightening that flashes
amid clouds. Verily, it seemed as if a thousand suns rose there, filling
every side with a dazzling splendour. The energy of the Supreme Lord
looked like the Samvartaka fire which destroys all creatures at the end
of the Yuga. Overspread with that energy, the horizon became such that I
could see nothing on any side. Filled with anxiety I once more thought
what it could mean. That energy, however, did not pervade every side for
any length of time, for soon, through the illusion of that god of gods,
the horizon became clear. I then behold the illustrious Sthanu or
Maheswara seated on the back of his bull, of blessed and agreeable
appearance and looking like a smokeless fire. And the great god was
accompanied by Parvati of faultless features. Indeed, I beheld the
blue-throated and high-souled Sthanu, unattached to everything, that
receptacle of all kinds of force, endued with eight and ten arms and
adorned with all kinds of ornaments. Clad in white vestments, he wore
white garlands, and had white unguents smeared upon his limbs. The colour
of his banner, irresistible in the universe, was white. The sacred thread
round his person was also white. He was surrounded with associates, all
possessed with prowess equal to his own, who were singing or dancing or
playing on diverse kinds of musical instruments. A crescent moon, of pale
hue, formed his crown, and placed on his forehead it looked like the moon
that rises in the autumnal firmament. He seemed to dazzle with splendour,
in consequence of his three eyes that looked like three suns. The garland
of the purest white, that was on his body, shone like a wreath of
lotuses, of the purest white, adorned with jewels and gems. I also
beheld, O Govinda, the weapons in their embodied forms and fraught with
every kind of energy, that belong to Bhava of immeasurable prowess. The
high-souled deity held a bow whose hues resembled those of the rainbow.
That bow is celebrated under the name of the Pinaka and is in reality a
mighty snake. Indeed, that snake of seven heads and vast body, of sharp
fangs and virulent poison, of large neck and the masculine sex, was
twined round with the cord that served as its bowstring. And there was a
shaft whose splendour looked like that of the sun or of the fire that
appears at the end of the Yuga. Verily, that shaft was the excellent
Pasupata that mighty and terrible weapon, which is without a second,
indescribable for its power, and capable of striking every creature with
fear. Of vast proportions, it seemed to constantly vomit sparks of fire.
Possessed of one foot, of large teeth, and a thousand heads and thousand
Stomachs, it has a thousand arms, a thousand tongues, and a thousand
eyes. Indeed, it seemed to continually vomit fire. O thou of mighty arms,
that weapon is superior to the Brahma, the Narayana, the Aindra, the
Agneya, and the Varuna weapons. Verily, it is capable of neutralising
every other weapon in the universe. It was with that weapon that the
illustrious Mahadeva had in days of yore, burnt and consumed in a moment
the triple city of the Asuras. With the greatest ease, O Govinda,
Mahadeva, using that single arrow, achieved that feat. That weapon, shot
by Mahadeva's arms, can, without doubt consume in half the time taken up
by a twinkling of the eyes the entire universe with all its mobile and
immobile creatures. In the universe there is no being including even
Brahma and Vishnu and the deities, that are incapable of being slain by
that weapon. O sire, I saw that excellent, wonderful and incomparable
weapon in the hand of Mahadeva. There is another mysterious and very
powerful weapon which is equal or perhaps, superior to the Pasupata
weapon. I beheld that also. It is celebrated in all the worlds as the Sum
of the Sula-armed Mahadeva. Hurled by the illustrious deity, that weapon
is competent to rive the entire Earth or dry up the waters of the ocean
or annihilate the entire universe. In days of yore, Yuvanaswa's son, king
Mandhatri, that conqueror of the three worlds, possessed of imperial sway
and endued with abundant energy, was, with all his troops, destroyed by
means of that weapon. Endued with great might and great energy and
resembling Sakra himself in prowess, the king, O Govinda, was slain by
the Rakshasa Lavana with the aid of this Sula which he had got from Siva.
The Sula has a very keen point. Exceedingly terrible, it is capable of
causing everybody's hair stand on its end. I saw it in the hand of
Mahadeva, as if roaring with rage, having contracted its forehead into
three wrinkles. It resembled, O Krishna, a smokeless fire or the sun that
rises at the end of the Yuga. The handle of that Sula, was made of a
mighty snake. It is really indescribable. It looked like the universal
Destroyer himself armed with his noose. I saw this weapon, O Govinda, in
the hand of Mahadeva. I beheld also another weapon, viz., that
sharp-edged battle-axe which, in days of yore, was given unto Rama by the
gratified Mahadeva for enabling him to exterminate the Kshatriyas. It was
with this weapon that Rama (of Bhrigu's race) slew in dreadful battle the
great Karttaviryya who was the ruler of all the world. It was with that
weapon that Jamadagni's son, O Govinda, was able to exterminate the
Kshatriyas for one and twenty times. Of blazing edge and exceedingly
terrible, that axe was hanging on the shoulder, adorned with a snake, of
Mahadeva. Indeed, it shone on Mahadeva's person like the flame of a
blazing fire. I beheld innumerable other celestial weapons with Mahadeva
of great intelligence. I have, however named only a few, O sinless one,
in consequence of their principal character. On the left side of the
great god stood the Grandsire Brahma seated on an excellent car unto
which were attached swans endued with the speed of the mind. On the same
side could be seen Narayana also, seated on the son of Vinata, and
bearing the conch, the discus, and the mace. Close to the goddess Uma was
Skanda seated on his peacock, bearing his fatal dart and bells, and
looking like another Agni. In the front of Mahadeva I beheld Nandi
standing armed with his Sula and looking like a second Sankara (for
prowess and energy). The Munis headed by the Self-born Manu and Rishis
having Bhrigu for their first, and the deities with Sakra at their head,
all came there. All the tribes of spirits and ghosts, and the celestial
Mothers, stood surrounding Mahadeva and saluting him with reverence. The
deities were engaged in singing the praises of Mahadeva by uttering
diverse hymns. The Grandsire Brahma uttering a Rathantara, praised
Mahadeva. Narayana also, uttering the Jyestha Saman, sang the praises of
Bhava. Sakra also did the same with the aid of those foremost of Vedic
Mantras, viz., the Sata-Rudriam. Verily, Brahma and Narayana and
Sakra,--those three high-souled deities,--shone there like three
sacrificial fires. In their midst shone the illustrious God like the sun
in the midst of his corona, emerged from autumnal clouds. I beheld
myriads of suns and moons, also in the sky, O Kesava. I then praised the
illustrious Lord of everything, the supreme Master of the universe.

"Upamanyu continued, 'I said, Salutations to thee, O illustrious one, O
thou that constitutest the refuge of all things, O thou that art called
Mahadeva! Salutations to thee that assumest the form of Sakra, that art
Sakra, and that disguisest thyself in the form and vestments of Sakra.
Salutations to thee that art armed with the thunder, to thee that art
tawny, and thee that art always armed with the Pinaka. Salutations to
thee that always bearest the conch and the Sula. Salutations to thee that
art clad in black, to thee that art of dark and curly hair, to thee that
hast a dark deer-skin for thy upper garment, to thee that presidest over
the eighth lunation of the dark fortnight. Salutations to thee that art
of white complexion, to thee that art called white, to thee that art clad
in white robes, to thee that hast limbs smeared with white ashes, to thee
that art ever engaged in white deeds. Salutations to thee that art red of
colour, to thee that art clad in red vestments, to thee that ownest a red
banner with red flags, to thee that wearest red garlands and usest red
unguents. Salutations to thee that art brown in complexion, to thee that
art clad in brown vestments, to thee, that hast a brown banner with brown
flags, to thee that wearest brown garlands and usest brown unguents.
Salutations to thee that hast the umbrella of royalty held over thy head,
to thee that wearest the foremost of crowns. Salutations unto thee that
art adorned with half a garland and half an armlet, to thee that art
decked with one ring for one year, to thee that art endued with the speed
of the mind, to thee that art endued with great effulgence. Salutations
to thee that art the foremost of deities, to thee that art the foremost
of ascetics, to thee that art the foremost of celestials. Salutations to
thee that wearest half a wreath of lotuses, to thee that hast many
lotuses on thy body. Salutations to thee that hast half thy body smeared
with sandal paste, to thee that hast half thy body decked with garlands
of flowers and smeared with fragrant unguents.[62] Salutations to thee
that art of the complexion of the Sun, to thee that art like the Sun, to
thee whose face is like the Sun, to thee that hast eyes each of which is
like the Sun. Salutations to thee that art Soma, to thee that art as mild
as Soma, to thee that bearest the lunar disc, to thee that art of lunar
aspect, to thee that art the foremost of all creatures, to thee that art
adorned with a set of the most beautiful teeth. Salutations to thee that
art of a dark complexion, to thee that art of a fair complexion, to thee
that hast a form half of which is yellow and half white, to thee that
hast a body half of which is male and half female, to thee that art both
male and female. Salutations to thee that ownest a bull for thy vehicle,
to thee that proceedest riding on the foremost of elephants, to thee that
art obtained with difficulty, to thee that art capable of going to places
unapproachable by others. Salutations to thee whose praises are sung by
the Ganas, to thee that art devoted to the diverse Ganas, to thee that
followest the track that is trod by the Ganas, to thee that art always
devoted to the Ganas as to a vow. Salutations to thee that art of the
complexion of white clouds, to thee that hast the splendour of the
evening clouds, to thee that art incapable of being described by names,
to thee that art of thy own form (having nothing else in the universe
with which it can be compared). Salutations to thee that wearest a
beautiful garland of red colour, to thee that art clad in robes of red
colour. Salutations to thee that hast the crown of the head decked with
gems, to thee that art adorned with a half-moon, to thee that wearest
many beautiful gems in thy diadem, to thee that hast eight flowers on thy
head. Salutations to thee that hast a fiery mouth and fiery eyes, to thee
that hast eyes possessing the effulgence of a thousand moons, to thee
that art of the form of fire, to thee that art beautiful and agreeable,
to thee that art inconceivable and mysterious. Salutations to thee that
rangest through the firmament, to thee that lovest and residest in lands
affording pasture to kine, to thee that walkest on the Earth, to thee
that art the Earth, to thee that art infinite, to thee that art
exceedingly auspicious. Salutations to thee that art unclad (or has the
horizon alone for thy vestments), to thee that makest a happy home of
every place where thou mayst happen to be for the moment. Salutations to
thee that hast the universe for thy home, to thee that hast both
Knowledge and Felicity for thy Soul. Salutations to thee that always
wearest a diadem, to thee that wearest a large armlet, to thee that hast
a snake for the garland round thy neck, to thee that wearest many
beautiful ornaments on thy person. Salutations to thee that hast the Sun,
the Moon, and Agni for thy three eyes, to thee that art possessed of a
thousand eyes, to thee that art both male and female, to thee that art
divested of sex, to thee that art a Sankhya, to thee that art a Yogin.
Salutations to thee that art of the grace of those deities who are
worshipped in sacrifices, to thee that art the Atharvans, to thee that
art the alleviator of all kinds of disease and pain, to thee that art the
dispeller of every sorrow. Salutations to thee that roarest as deep as
the clouds, to thee that puttest forth diverse kinds of illusions, to
thee that presidest over the soil and over the seed that is sown in it,
to thee that art the Creator of everything. Salutations to thee that art
the Lord of all the celestials, to thee that art the Master of the
universe, to thee that art endued with the speed of the wind, to thee
that art of the form of the wind. Salutations to thee that wearest a
garland of gold, to thee that sportest on hills and mountains[63], to
thee that art adorned by all who are enemies of the gods, to thee that
art possessed of fierce speed and energy. Salutations to thee that torest
away one of the heads of the Grandsire Brahma, to thee that hast slain
the Asura named Mahisha, to thee that assumest three forms, to thee that
bearest every form. Salutations to thee that art the destroyer of the
triple city of the Asuras, to thee that art the destroyer of (Daksha's)
sacrifice, to thee that art the destroyer of the body of Kama (the deity
of Desire), to thee that wieldest the rod of destruction. Salutations to
thee that art Skanda, to thee that art Visakha, to thee that art the rod
of the Brahmana, to thee that art Bhava, to thee that art Sarva, to thee
that art of universal form. Salutations to thee that art Isana, to thee
that art the destroyer of Bhaga, to thee that art the slayer of Andhaka,
to thee that art the universe, to thee that art possessed of illusion, to
thee that art both conceivable and inconceivable.[64] Thou art the one
end of all creatures, thou art the foremost, thou art the heart of
everything. Thou art the Brahma of all the deities, thou art the
Nilardhita Red and Blue of the Rudras. Thou art the Soul of the
creatures, thou art He who is called Purusha in the Sankhya philosophy,
thou art the Rishabha among all things sacred, thou art that which is
called auspicious by Yogins and which, according to them, is without
parts (being indivisible). Amongst those that are observant of the
different modes of life, thou art the House-holder, thou art the great
Lord amongst the lords of the universe. Thou art Kuvera among all the
Yakshas, and thou art Vishnu amongst all the sacrifices.[65] Thou art
Meru amongst mountains, thou art the Moon among all luminaries of the
firmament, thou art Vasishtha amongst Rishis, thou art Surya among the
planets. Thou art the lion among all wild animals, and among all domestic
animals, thou art the bull that is worshipped by all people. Among the
Adityas thou art Vishnu (Upendra), among the Vasu thou art Pavaka, among
birds thou art the son of Vinata (Garuda), and among snakes thou art
Ananta (Sesha). Among the Vedas thou art the Samans, among the Yajushes
thou art the Sata-Rudriyam, among Yogins thou art Sanatkumara, and among
Sankhyas thou art Kapila. Among the Maruts thou art Sakra, among the
Pitris thou art Devarat, among all the regions (for the residence of
created beings) thou art the region of Brahman, and amongst all the ends
that creatures attain to, thou art Moksha or Emancipation. Thou art the
Ocean of milk among all oceans, among all rocky eminences thou art
Himavat, among all the orders thou art the Brahmana, and among all
learned Brahmanas thou art he that has undergone and is observant of the
Diksha. Thou art the Sun among all things in the world, thou art the
destroyer called Kala. Thou art whatever else possessed of superior
energy of eminence that exists in the universe. Thou art possessed of
supreme puissance. Even this is what represents my certain conclusion.
Salutations to thee, O puissant and illustrious one, O thou that art kind
to all thy worshippers. Salutations to thee, O lord of Yogins. I bow to
thee, O original cause of the universe. Be thou gratified with me that am
thy worshipper, that am very miserable and helpless, O Eternal Lord, do
thou become the refuge of this adorer of thine that is very weak and
miserable. O Supreme Lord, it behoveth thee to pardon all those
transgressions of which I have been guilty, taking compassion upon me on
the ground of my being thy devoted worshipper. I was stupefied by thee, O
Lord of all the deities, in consequence of the disguise in which thou
showest thyself to me. O Maheswara, I did not give thee the Arghya or
water to wash thy feet.[66] Having hymned the praises of Isana in this
way, I offered him, with great devotion, water to wash his feet and the
ingredients of the Arghya, and then, with joined hands, I resigned myself
to him, being prepared to do whatever he would bid. Then, O sire, an
auspicious shower of flowers fell upon my head, possessed of celestial
fragrance and bedewed with cold water. The celestial musicians began to
play on their kettle-drums. A delicious breeze, fragrant and agreeable,
began to blow and fill me with pleasure. Then Mahadeva accompanied by his
spouse, and having the bull for his sign, having been gratified with me,
addressed the celestials assembled there in these words, filling me with
great joy,--Behold, ye deities, the devotion of the high-souled Upamanyu.
Verily, steady and great is that devotion, and entirely immutable, for it
exists unalterably.--Thus addressed by the great God armed with the Sula,
the deities, O Krishna, having bowed down unto him and joined their hands
in reverence, said these words,--O illustrious one, O God of the gods, O
master of the universe, O Lord of all, let this best of regenerate
persons obtain from thee the fruition of all his desires.--Thus addressed
by all the deities, with the Grandsire Brahma among them. Sarva,
otherwise called Isa and Sankara, said these words as if smiling unto
me.'"

"The illustrious Sankara said, 'O dear Upamanyu, I am gratified with
thee. Behold me, O foremost of Munis, O learned Rishi, thou art firmly
devoted to me and well hast thou been tested by me. I have been very
highly pleased with thee in consequence of this thy devotion to Siva. I
shall, therefore, give thee today the fruition of whatever desires thou
mayst have in thy heart. Thus addressed by Mahadeva of great wisdom,
tears of joy came into my eyes and my hair stood on its end (through
emotion). Kneeling down unto him and bowing unto him repeatedly, I then,
with a voice that was choked with delight, said unto him,--O illustrious
god, it seems to me that I was hitherto dead and that it is only today
that I have taken my birth, and that my birth bath today borne fruit,
since I am staying now in the presence of Him who is the Master of both
the deities and the Asuras! Who else is more praiseworthy than I, since I
am beholding with these eyes of mine, Him of immeasurable prowess whom
the very deities are unable to behold without first paying hearty
worship? That which they that are possessed of learning and wisdom say is
the highest of all topics, which is Eternal, which is distinguished from
all else, which is unborn, which is Knowledge, which is indestructible,
is identical with thee, O puissant and illustrious one, thee that art the
beginning of all the topics, thee that art indestructible and changeless,
thee that art conversant with the ordinances which govern all the topics,
thee that art the foremost of Purushas, thee that art the highest of the
high. Thou art he that hadst created from thy right side the Grandsire
Brahma, the Creator of all things. Thou art he that hadst created from
thy left side Vishnu for protecting the Creation. Thou art that puissant
Lord who didst create Rudra when the end of the Yuga came and when the
Creation was once more to be dissolved. That Rudra, who sprang from thee
destroyed the Creation with all its mobile and immobile beings, assuming
the form of Kala of great energy, of the cloud Samvartaka (charged with
water which myriads of oceans are not capacious enough to bear), and of
the all consuming fire. Verily, when the period comes for the dissolution
of the universe, that Rudra stands, ready to swallow up the universe.
Thou art that Mahadeva, who is the original Creator of the universe with
all its mobile and immobile entities. Thou art he, who, at the end of the
Kalpa, stands, withdrawing all things into thyself. Thou art he that
pervadest all things, that art the Soul of all things, thou art the
Creator of the Creator of all entities. Incapable of being seen by even
any of the deities, thou art he that exists, pervading all entities. If,
O lord, thou hast been gratified with me and if thou wouldst grant me
boons, let this be the boon, O Lord of all the deities, that my devotion
to thee may remain unchanged. O best of the deities, let me, through thy
grace, have knowledge of the Present, the Past, and the Future. I shall
also, with all my kinsmen and friends, always eat food mixed with milk.
And let thy illustrious self be for ever present at our retreat.--Thus
addressed by me, the illustrious Maheswara endued with supreme energy,
that Master of all mobile and immobile, viz., Siva, worshipped of all the
universe, then said unto me these words.'

"The illustrious Deity said, 'Be thou free from every misery and pain,
and be thou above decrepitude and death. Be thou possessed of fame, be
thou endued with great energy, and let spiritual knowledge be thine. Thou
shalt, through my grace, be always sought for by the Rishis. Be thy
behaviour good and righteous, be every desirable attribute thine, be thou
possessed of universal knowledge, and be thou of agreeable appearance.
Let undecaying youth be thine, and let thy energy be like that of fire.
Wherever, again, thou mayst desire the presence of the ocean of milk that
is so agreeable to thee, there shall that ocean appear before thee (ready
for being utilised by thee and thy friends for purposes of thy food). Do
thou, with thy friends, always obtain food prepared with milk, with the
celestial nectar besides being mixed with it.[67] After the expiration of
a Kalpa thou shalt then obtain my companionship. Thy family and race and
kinsmen shall be exhaustless. O foremost of regenerate ones, thy devotion
to me shalt be eternal. And. O best of Brahmanas, I shall always accord
my presence to thy asylum. Live, O son, whithersoever thou likest, and
let no anxiety be thine. Thought of by thee, I shall, O learned Brahmana,
grant thee a sight of myself again.--Having said these words, and granted
me these boons, the illustrious Isana, endued with the effulgence of
millions of Suns, disappeared there and then. It was even thus, O
Krishna, that I beheld, with the aid of austere penances, that God of
gods. I also obtained all that was said by the great Deity endued with
supreme intelligence. Behold, O Krishna, before thy eyes, these Siddhas
residing here and these Rishis and Vidyadharas and Yakshas and Gandharvas
and Apsaras. Behold these trees and creepers and plants yielding all
sorts of flowers and fruits. Behold them bearing the flowers of every
season, with beautiful leaves, and shedding a sweet fragrance all around.
O thou of mighty arms, all these are endued with a celestial nature
through the grace of that god of gods, that Supreme Lord, that
high-souled Deity.'

"Vasudeva continued, 'Hearing these words of his and beholding, as it
were, with my own eyes all that he had related to me, I became filled
with wonder. I then addressed the great ascetic Upamanyu and said unto
him,--Deserving of great praise art thou, O foremost of learned
Brahmanas, for what righteous man is there other than thou whose retreat
enjoys the distinction of being honoured with the presence of that God of
gods? Will the puissant Siva, will the great Sankara, O chief of
ascetics, grant me also a sight of his person and show me favour.'

"Upamanyu said, 'Without doubt, O thou of eyes like lotus-petals, thou
wilt obtain a sight of Mahadeva very soon, even as, O sinless one, I
succeeded in obtaining a sight of him. O thou of immeasurable prowess, I
see with my spiritual eyes that thou wilt, in the sixth month from this,
succeed in obtaining a sight of Mahadeva, O best of all persons. Thou, O
foremost of the Yadus, wilt obtain from Maheswara and his spouse, four
and twenty boons. I tell thee what is true. Through the grace of that
Deity endued with supreme wisdom, the Past, the Future and the Present
are known to me. The great Hara has favoured these Rishis numbering by
thousands and others as numerous. Why will not the puissant Deity show
favour to thee, O Mahadeva? The meeting of the gods is always commendable
with one like thee, with one that is devoted to the Brahmanas, with one
that is full of compassion and that is full of faith. I shall give thee
certain Mantras. Recite them continuously. By this thou art certain to
behold Sankara.'

"The blessed Vishnu continued, 'I then said unto him, O regenerate one,
through thy grace, O great ascetic. I shall behold the lord of the
deities, that grinder of multitudes of Diti's sons. Eight days, O
Bharata, passed there like an hour, all of us being thus occupied with
talk on Mahadeva. On the eighth day, I underwent the Diksha (initiation)
according to due rites, at the hands of that Brahmana and received the
staff from his hands. I underwent the prescribed shave. I took up a
quantity of Kusa blades in my hand. I wore rags for my vestments. I
rubbed my person with ghee. I encircled a cord of Munja grass round my
loins. For one month I lived on fruits. The second month I subsisted upon
water. The third, the fourth and the fifth months I passed, living upon
air alone. I stood all the while, supporting myself upon one foot and
with my arms also raised upwards, and foregoing sleep all the while. I
then beheld, O Bharata, in the firmament an effulgence that seemed to be
as dazzling as that of a thousand Suns combined together. Towards the
centre of that effulgence, O son of Pandu, I saw a cloud looking like a
mass of blue hills, adorned with rows of cranes, embellished with many a
grand rainbow, with flashes of lightning and the thunder-fire looking
like eyes set on it.[68] Within that cloud was the puissant Mahadeva.
himself of dazzling splendour, accompanied by his spouse Uma. Verily, the
great Deity seemed to shine with his penances, energy, beauty,
effulgence, and his dear spouse by his side. The puissant Maheswara, with
his spouse by his side, shone in the midst of that cloud. The appearance
seemed to be like that of the Sun in the midst of racking clouds with the
Moon by his side. The hair on my body, O son of Kunti, stood on its end,
and my eyes expanded with wonder upon beholding Hara, the refuge of all
the deities and the dispeller of all their griefs. Mahadeva was adorned
with a diadem on his head. He was armed with his Sula. He was clad in a
tiger-skin, had matted locks on his head, and bore the staff (of the
Sanyasin) in one of his hands. He was armed, besides with his Pinaka and
the thunderbolt. His teeth was sharp-pointed. He was decked with an
excellent bracelet for the upper arm. His sacred thread was constituted
by a snake. He wore an excellent garland of diversified colours on his
bosom, that hung down to his toes. Verily, I beheld him like the
exceedingly bright moon of an autumnal evening. Surrounded by diverse
clans of spirits and ghosts, he looked like the autumnal Sun difficult of
being gazed at for its dazzling brightness. Eleven hundred Rudras stood
around that Deity of restrained soul and white deeds, then seated upon
his bull. All of them were employed in hymning his praises. The Adityas,
the Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Viswedevas, and the twin Aswins praised that
Lord of the universe by uttering the hymns occurring in the scriptures.
The puissant Indra and his brother Upendra, the two sons of Aditi, and
the Grandsire Brahma, all uttered, in the presence of Bhava, the
Rathantara Saman. Innumerable masters of Yoga, all the regenerate Rishis
with their children, all the celestial Rishis, the goddess Earth, the Sky
(between Earth and Heaven), the Constellations, the Planets, the Months,
the Fortnights, the Seasons, Night, the Years, the Kshanas, the Muhurtas,
the Nimeshas, the Yugas one after another, all the celestial Sciences and
branches of knowledge, and all beings conversant with Truth, were seen
bowing down unto that Supreme Preceptor, that great Father, that giver
(or origin) of Yoga. Sanatkumara, the Vedas, the Histories, Marichi,
Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, the seven Manus, Soma, the
Atharvans, and Vrihaspati, Bhrigu, Daksha, Kasyapa, Vasishtha, Kasya, the
Schandas, Diksha, the Sacrifices, Dakshina, the Sacrificial Fires, the
Havis (clarified butter) poured in sacrifices, and all the requisites of
the sacrifices, were beheld by me, O Yudhishthira, standing there in
their embodied forms. All the guardians of the worlds, all the Rivers,
all the snakes, the mountains, the celestial Mothers, all the spouses and
daughters of the celestials, thousands upon thousands and millions of
ascetics, were seen to bow down to that puissant Lord who is the soul of
tranquillity. The Mountains, the Oceans, and the Points of the compass
also did the same, the Gandharvas and the Apsaras highly skilled in
music, in celestial strains, sang and hymned the praises of Bhava who is
full of wonder. The Vidyadharas, the Danavas, the Guhyakas, the
Rakshasas, and all created beings, mobile and immobile, adorned, in
thought, word and deed, that puissant Lord. Before me, that Lord of all
the gods viz., Sarva, appeared seated in all his glory. Seeing that Isana
had showed himself to me by being seated in glory before my eyes, the
whole universe, with the Grandsire and Sakra, looked at me. I, however,
had not the power to look at Mahadeva. The great Deity then addressed me
saying, 'Behold, O Krishna, and speak to me. Thou hast adorned me
hundreds and thousands of times. There is no one in the three worlds that
is dearer to me than thou.' After I had bowed unto him, his spouse, viz.,
the goddess Uma, became gratified with me. I then addressed in these
words the great God whose praises are hymned by all the deities with the
Grandsire Brahma at their head.'

"The blessed Vishnu said, 'I saluted Mahadeva, saying,--Salutations to
thee, O thou that art the eternal origin of all things. The Rishis say
that thou art the Lord of the Vedas. The righteous say that thou art
Penance, thou art Sattwa, thou art Rajas, thou art Tamas, and thou art
Truth. Thou art Brahman, thou art Rudra, thou art Varuna, thou art Agni,
thou art Manu, thou art Bhava, thou art Dhatri, thou art Tashtri, thou
art Vidhatri, thou art the puissant Master of all things, and thou art
everywhere. All beings, mobile and immobile, have sprung from thee. This
triple world with all its mobile and immobile entities, has been created
by thee. The Rishis say that thou art superior to the senses, the mind,
the vital breaths, the seven sacrificial fires, all others that have
their refuge in the all-pervading Soul, and all the deities that are
adored and worthy of adoration. Thou, O illustrious one, art the Vedas,
the Sacrifices, Soma, Dakshina, Pavaka, Havi, and all other requisites of
sacrifice. The merit obtained by sacrifices, gifts made to others, the
study of the Vedas, vows, regulations in respect of restraint, Modesty,
Fame, Prosperity, Splendour, Contentment, and Success, all exist for
leading to thee.[69] Desire, Wrath, Fear, Cupidity, Pride, Stupefaction,
and Malice, Pains and Diseases, are, O illustrious one, thy children.
Thou art all acts that creatures do, thou art the joy and sorrow that
flow from those acts, thou art the absence of joy and sorrow, thou art
that Ignorance which is the indestructible seed of Desire, thou art the
high origin of Mind, thou art Puissance, and thou art Eternity.[70] Thou
art the Unmanifest, thou art Pavana, thou art inconceivable, thou art the
thousand-rayed Sun, thou art the effulgent Chit, thou art the first of
all the topics, and thou art the refuge of life.[71] The use of words
like Mahat, Soul, Understanding, Brahman, Universe, Sambhu, and Self-born
and other words occurring in succession (in the Vedas), show that thy
nature has been judged (by persons conversant with the Vedas) as
identical with Mahat and Soul. Verily, regarding thee as all this, the
learned Brahmanas win over that ignorance which lies at the root of the
world. Thou residest in the heart of all creatures, and thou art adored
by the Rishis as Kshetrajna. Thy arms and feet extend to every place, and
thy eyes, head, and face are everywhere. Thou hearest everywhere in the
universe, and thou stayest, pervading all things. Of all acts that are
performed in the Nimeshas and other divisions of time that spring in
consequence of the puissance of the Sun, thou art the fruit.[72] Thou art
the original effulgence (of the supreme Chit). Thou art Purusha, and thou
residest in the hearts of all things. Thou art the various Yogic
attributes of success, viz., Subtility and Grossness and Fruition and
Supremacy and Effulgence and Immutability.[73] Understanding and
intelligence and all the worlds rest upon thee. They that are devoted to
meditation, that are always engaged in Yoga, that are devoted to or firm
in Truth and that have subjugated their passions, seek thee and rest on
thee.[74] They that know thee for one that is Immutable, or one that
resides in all hearts, or one that is endued with supreme puissance, or
one that is the ancient Purusha, or one that is pure Knowledge, or one
that is the effulgent Chit, or one that is the highest refuge of all
persons endued with intelligence, are certainly persons of great
intelligence. Verily, such persons stay, transcending intelligence.[75]
By understanding the seven subtile entities (viz., Mahat, Ego, and five
subtile primal elements called Tanmatras), by comprehending thy six
attributes (of Omniscience, Contentment of Fullness, Knowledge without
beginning, Independence, Puissance that is not at fault at any time and
that is infinite), and being conversant with Yoga that is freed from
every false notion, the man of knowledge succeeds in entering into thy
great self.--After I had said these words, O Partha, unto Bhava, that
dispeller of grief and pain, the universe, both mobile and immobile, sent
up a leonine shout (expressive of their approval of the correctness of my
words). The innumerable Brahmanas there present, the deities and the
Asuras, the Nagas, the Pisachas, the Pitris, the birds, diverse
Rakshasas, diverse classes of ghosts and spirits, and all the great
Rishis, then bowed down unto that great Deity. There then fell upon my
head showers of celestial flowers possessed of great fragrance, and
delicious winds blew on the spot. The puissant Sankara then, devoted to
the good of the universe, looked at the goddess Uma and the lord of the
celestials and myself also, and thus spoke unto me,--We know, O Krishna,
that thou, O slayer of foes, art filled with the greatest devotion
towards us. Do what is for thy good. My love and affection for thee is
very great. Do thou ask for eight boons. I shall verily give them unto
thee, O Krishna, O best of all persons, tell me what they are, O chief of
the Yadavas. Name what thou wishest. However difficult of attainment they
be, thou shalt have them still.'"[76]



SECTION XV

"The blessed Krishna said, 'Bowing my head with great joy unto that mass
of energy and effulgence, I said these words unto the great Deity, with a
heart filled with gladness,--Firmness in virtue, the slaughter of foes in
battle, the highest fame, the greatest might, devotion to Yoga, thy
adjacence, and hundreds upon hundreds of children, these are the boons I
solicit of thee,--So be it,--said Sankara repeating the words I had
uttered. After this, the mother of the universe, the upholders of all
things, who cleanses, all things, viz., the spouse of Sarva, that vast
receptacle of penances said with a restrained soul these words unto
me,--'The puissant Mahadeva has granted thee, O sinless one, a son who
shall be named Samva. Do thou take from me also eight boons which thou
choosest. I shall certainly grant them to thee.--Bowing unto her with a
bend of my head, I said unto her, O son of Pandu,--I solicit from thee
non-anger against the Brahmanas, grace of my father, a hundred sons, the
highest enjoyments, love for my family, the grace of my mother, the
attainment of tranquillity and peace, and cleverness in every act!'

"Uma said, 'It shall be even so, O thou that art possessed of prowess and
puissance equal to that of a celestial. I never say what is untrue. Thou
shalt have sixteen thousand wives. Thy love for them and theirs also for
thee shall be unlimited. From all thy kinsmen also, thou shalt receive
the highest affection. Thy body too shall be most beautiful. Seven
thousand guests will daily feed at thy palace.'

"Vasudeva continued, 'Having thus granted me boons both the god and the
goddess, O Bharata, disappeared there and then with their Ganas, O elder
brother of Bhima. All those wonderful facts I related fully, O best of
kings, to that Brahmana of great energy, viz., Upamanyu (from whom I had
obtained the Diksha before adoring Mahadeva). Bowing down unto the great
God, Upamanyu said these words to me.'

"Upamanyu said, 'There is no deity like Sarva. There is no end or refuge
like Sarva. There is none that can give so many or such high boons. There
is none that equal him in battle.'"



SECTION XVI

"Upamanyu said, 'There was in the Krita age, O sire, a Rishi celebrated
under the name of Tandi. With great devotion of heart he adored, with the
aid of Yoga-meditation, the great God for ten thousand years. Listen to
me as I tell thee fruit or reward he reaped of such extraordinary
devotion. He succeeded in beholding Mahadeva and praised him by uttering
some hymns. Thinking, with the aid of his penances, of Him who is the
supreme Soul and who is immutable and undeteriorating, Tandi became
filled with wonder, and said these words,--I seek the protection of Him
whom the Sankhyas describe and the Yogins think of as the Supreme, the
Foremost, the Purusha, the pervader of all things, and the Master of all
existent objects, of him who, the learned say, is the cause of both the
creation and the destruction of the universe; of him who is superior to
all the celestials, the Asuras, and the Munis, of him who has nothing
higher, who is unborn, who is the Lord of all things, who has neither
beginning nor end, and who is endued with supreme puissance, who is
possessed of the highest felicity, and who is effulgent and
sinless.--After he had said these words, Tandi beheld before him that
ocean of penances, that great Deity who is immutable and undeteriorating,
who is without compare, who is inconceivable, who is eternal, and who is
without any change, who is indivisible, who is whole, who is Brahma, who
transcends all attributes, and who is endued with attributes, who is the
highest delight of Yogins, who is without deterioration, who is called
Emancipation, who is the refuge of the Mind, of Indra, of Agni, of the
god of wind, of the entire universe, and of the Grandsire Brahma; who is
incapable of being conceived by the Mind, who is without mutation of any
kind, who is pure, who is capable of being apprehended by understanding
only and who is immaterial as the Mind; who is difficult of
comprehension, who is incapable of being measured, who is difficult of
being attained by persons of uncleansed souls, who is the origin of the
universe, and who transcends both the universe and the attribute of
darkness; who is ancient, who is Purusha, who is possessed of effulgence,
and who is higher than the highest. The Rishi Tandin, desirous of
beholding Him who making himself endued with life-breaths, resides in
what results from it viz., Jiva, in the form of that effulgence which is
called the Mind, passed many years in the practice of the severest
austerities, and having succeeded in beholding Him as the reward of those
penances, he praised the great God in the following terms.'

"Tandi said, 'Thou art the holiest of holies[77] and the refuge of all, O
foremost of all beings endued with intelligence. Thou art the fiercest
energy of all kinds of energy. Thou art the austerest penance of all
penances. Thou, O puissant one, art the liberal giver of blessings. Thou
art the supreme Truth. Salutations to thee, O thou of a thousand rays,
and, O refuge of all felicity. Thou art the giver of that Nirvana which,
O puissant one, Yatis, standing in fear of birth and death, strive for so
hard. The Grandsire Brahma, he of a hundred sacrifices, (viz., Indra)
Vishnu, the Viswadevas, the great Rishis, are incapable of comprehending
thee and thy real nature. How then can persons like ourselves hope to
comprehend thee? From thee flows everything. Upon thee rests everything.
Thou art called Kala, thou art called Purusha, thou art called Brahma.
Celestial Rishis conversant with the Puranas, say that thou hast three
bodies viz., those pertaining to Kalas, those pertaining to Purusha and
those pertaining to Brahma or the three forms namely Brahma, Vishnu and
Rudra. Thou art Adhi-Purusha, (occupying the physical flame from head to
foot) thou art Adhyatma, thou art Adhibhuta, and Adhi-Daivata, thou art
Adhi-loka, Adhi-Vijnanam and Adhi-Yajna.[78] Men of wisdom, when they
succeed in knowing thee that residest in themselves and that art
incapable of being known by the very gods, become freed from all bonds
and pass into a state of existence that transcends all sorrow.[79] They
that do not wish to know thee, O thou of great puissance, have to undergo
innumerable births and deaths. Thou art the door of heaven and of
Emancipation. Thou art he that projectest all beings into existence and
withdrawest them again into thyself. Thou art the great giver. Thou art
heaven, thou art Emancipation, thou art desire (the seed of action). Thou
art wrath that inspires creatures. Thou art Sattwa, thou art Rajas, thou
art Tamas, thou art the nether regions, and thou art the upper regions.
Thou art the Grandsire Brahma, thou art Bhava, thou art Vishnu, thou art
Skanda, thou art Indra, thou art Savitri, thou art Yama, thou art Varuna,
Soma, thou art Dhatri, thou art Manu, thou art Vidhatri and thou art
Kuvera, the Lord of treasures. Thou art Earth, thou art Wind, thou art
Water, thou art Agni, thou art Space, thou art Speech, thou art the
Understanding, thou art Steadiness, thou art Intelligence, thou art the
acts that creatures do, thou art Truth, thou art Falsehood, thou art
existent and thou art non-existent. Thou art the senses, thou art that
which transcends Prakriti, thou art immutable. Thou art superior to the
universe of existent objects, thou art superior to the universe of
non-existent objects, thou art capable of being conceived, thou art
incapable of being conceived. That which is supreme Brahman, that which
is the highest entity, that which is the end of both the Sankhyas and the
Yogins, is, without doubt, identical with thee. Verily, rewarded have I
been today by thee in consequence of thy granting me a sight of thy form.
I have attained the end which the righteous alone attain to. I have been
rewarded with that end which is solicited by persons whose understandings
have been cleansed by Knowledge. Alas, so long I was steeped in
Ignorance; for this long period I was a senseless fool, since I had no
knowledge of thee that art the Supreme Deity, thee that art the only
eternal Entity as can be only known by all persons endued with wisdom. In
course of innumerable lives have I at last succeeded in acquiring that
Devotion towards thee in consequence of which thou hast shown thyself to
me. O thou that art ever inclined to extend thy grace to those that are
devoted to thee. He that succeeds in knowing thee is enable to enjoy
immortality. Thou art that which is ever a mystery with the gods, the
Asuras, and the ascetics. Brahman is concealed in the cave of the heart.
The very ascetics are unable to behold or know Him.[80] Thou art that
puissant deity who is the doer of everything and whose face is turned
towards every direction. Thou art the Soul of all things, thou seest all
things, thou pervadest all things, and thou knowest all things. Thou
makest a body for thyself, and bearest that body. Thou art an embodied
Being. Thou enjoyest a body, and thou art the refuge of all embodied
creatures. Thou art the creator of the life-breaths, thou possessest the
life-breaths, thou art one that is endued with life-breaths, thou art the
giver of the life-breaths, and thou art the refuge of all beings endued
with life-breaths. Thou art that Adhyatma which is the refuge of all
righteous persons that are devoted to Yoga-meditation and conversant with
the Soul and that are solicitous of avoiding rebirth. Verily, thou art
that Supreme Lord who is identical with that refuge. Thou art the giver
unto all creatures of whatever ends become theirs, fraught with happiness
or misery. Thou art he that ordains all created beings to birth and
death. Thou art the puissant Lord who grants success to Rishis crowned
with success in respect of the fruition of their wishes. Having created
all the worlds beginning with Bhu, together with all the denizens of
heaven, that upholdest and cherishest them all, distributing thyself into
thy well-known forms numbering Eight.[81] From thee flows everything.
Upon thee rests all things. All things, again, disappear in thee. Thou
art the sole object that is Eternal. Thou art that region of Truth which
is sought by the righteous and regarded by them as the highest. Thou art
that cessation of individual existence which Yogins seek. Thou art that
Oneness which is sought by persons conversant with the soul. Brahma and
the Siddhas expounding the mantras have concealed thee in a cave for
preventing the deities and Asuras and human beings from beholding
thee.[82] Although thou residest in the heart, yet thou are concealed.
Hence, stupefied by thee, deities and Asuras and human beings are all
unable to understand thee, O Bhava, truly and in all thy details. Unto
those persons that succeed in attaining to thee after having cleansed
themselves by devotion, thou showest thyself of thy own accord, O thou
that residest in all hearts.[83] By knowing thee one can avoid both death
and rebirth. Thou art the highest object of knowledge. By knowing thee no
higher object remains for one to know. Thou art the greatest object of
acquisition. The person that is truly wise, by acquiring thee, thinks
that there is no higher object to acquire. By attaining to thee that art
exceedingly subtile and that art the highest object of acquisition, the
man of wisdom becomes immortal and immutable. The followers of the
Sankhya system, well conversant with their own philosophy and possessing
a knowledge of the attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas and Tamas) and of those
called the topics of enquiry,--those learned men who transcend the
destructible by attaining to a knowledge of the subtile or
indestructible--succeed, by knowing thee, in freeing themselves from all
bonds. Persons conversant with the Vedas regard thee as the one object of
knowledge, which has been expounded in the Vedantas. These men, devoted
to the regulation of the breaths, always meditate on thee and at last
enter into thee as their highest end. Riding on the car made of Om, those
men enter into Maheswara. Of that which is called the Devayana (the path
of the deities) thou art the door called Aditya. Thou art again, the
door, called Chandramas, of that which is called the Pitriyana (the path
of the Pitris).[84] Thou art Kashtha, thou art the points of the horizon,
thou art the year, and thou art the Yugas. Thine is the sovereignty of
the heavens, thine is the sovereignty of the Earth, thou art the Northern
and the Southern declensions. The Grandsire Brahma in days of yore
uttered thy praises, O thou that art called Nilarohita (blue and red), by
reciting diverse hymns and urged thee to create living creatures.
Brahmanas conversant with Richs praise thee by uttering Richs, regarding
thee as unattached to all things and as divested of all forms. Adhyaryus,
in sacrifices, pour libations, uttering Yajushes the while, in honour of
thee that art the sole object of knowledge, according to the three
well-known ways.[85] Persons of cleansed understandings, that are
conversant with Samans, sing thee with the aid of Samans. Those
regenerate persons, again, that are conversant with the Atharvans, hymn
thee as Rita, as Truth, as the Highest, and as Brahma. Thou art the
highest cause, whence Sacrifice has flowed. Thou art the Lord, and thou
art Supreme. The night and day are thy sense of hearing and sense of
sight. The fortnights and months are thy head and arms. The seasons are
thy energy, penances are thy patience, and the year is thy anus, thighs
and feet. Thou art Mrityu. thou art Yama, thou art Hutasana, thou art
Kala, thou art endued with speed in respect of destruction, thou art the
original cause of Time, and thou art eternal Time. Thou art Chandramas
and Aditya. with all the stars and planets and the atmosphere that fills
space. Thou art the pole-star, thou art constellation called the seven
Rishis, thou art the seven regions beginning with Bhu. Thou art Pradhana
and Mahat, thou art Unmanifest, and thou art this world. Thou art the
universe beginning with Brahman and ending with the lowest forms of
vegetation. Thou art the beginning or original cause of all creatures.
Thou art the eight Prakritis.[86] Thou art, again, above the eight
Prakritis. Everything that exists, represents a portion of thy divine
Self. Thou art that supreme Felicity which is also Eternal. Thou art the
end which is attained to by all things. Thou art that highest existence
which is sought for by the Righteous. Thou art that state which is freed
from every anxiety. Thou art eternal Brahman! Thou art that highest state
which constitutes the meditation of persons learned in the scriptures and
the Vedangas. Thou art the highest Kashtha, thou art the highest Kala.
Thou art the highest Success, and thou art the highest Refuge. Thou art
the highest Tranquillity. Thou art the highest cessation of Existence. By
attaining to thee, Yogins think that they attain to the highest success
that is open to them. Thou art Contentment, thou art Success, thou art
the Sruti, and thou art the Smriti. Thou art that Refuge of the Soul
after which Yogins strive, and thou art that indestructible Prapti which
men of Knowledge pursue. Thou art, without doubt, that End which those
persons have in view that are habituated to sacrifices and that pour
sacrificial libations, impelled by specific desires, and that make large
presents on such occasions. Thou art that high End which is sought for by
persons that waste and scorch their bodies with severe penances with
ceaseless recitations, with those rigid vows and fasts that appertain to
their tranquil lives, and with other means of self-affliction. O Eternal
one, thou art that End which is theirs that are unattached to all things
and that have relinquished all acts. Thou, O Eternal one, art that End
which is theirs that are desirous of achieving Emancipation from rebirth,
that live in dissociation from all enjoyments, and that desire the
annihilation of the Prakriti elements. Thou art that high End, O
illustrious one, which is indescribable, which is stainless, which is the
immutable one, and which is theirs that are devoted to knowledge and
science. These are the live Ends that have been declared in the Vedas and
the Scriptures and the Puranas. It is through thy grace that persons
attain to those Ends, or, if they fail to attain to them, it is through
thy grace being denied to them.--It was thus Tandi, who was a vast heap
of penances, praised Isana. And he sang also that high Brahman which in
ancient days was sung by the Creator himself (in honour of Mahadeva).

"Upamanyu continued, 'Thus praised by that utterer of Brahma, Viz.,
Tandi, Mahadeva that illustrious and puissant Deity, who was accompanied
by his spouse lima, said these words. Tandi had further said,--Neither
Brahma, nor Indra nor Vishnu, nor the Viswedevas, nor the great Rishis,
know thee. Gratified at this, Siva said the following words.'

"The holy one said, 'Thou shalt be indestructible and eternal. Thou shalt
be freed from all sorrow. Great fame shall be thine. Thou shalt be endued
with energy. Spiritual knowledge shall be thine. All the Rishis shall
seek thee, and thy son, through my grace, shall become the author of
Sutras, O foremost of regenerate persons. What wishes of thine shall I
grant today? Tell me, O son, what those objects are which thou
desirest.--At this, Tandi joined his hands and said--O Lord, let my
devotion to thee be steady.'

"Upamanyu continued, 'Having given unto Tandi these boons and having
received the adorations of both the deities and the Rishis, the great
Deity disappeared there and then. When the illustrious deity, O lord of
the Yadavas, thus, disappeared with all his followers, the Rishi came to
my asylum and said unto me all that had happened to him. Do thou hear, O
foremost of men, all those celebrated names (of Mahadeva) that Tandi said
unto me for thy spiritual success. The Grandsire had at one time recited
ten thousand names that apply to Mahadeva. In the scriptures, a thousand
names occur of that illustrious deity. These names are not known to all.
O thou that transcendest destruction, in days of yore, the Grandsire
Brahma uttered these names for adoring the high-souled Deity. Having
acquired them through the grace of the Grandsire, Tandi communicated them
to me!'"[87]



SECTION XVII

"Vasudeva said, 'Concentrating his mind, O Yudhishthira. the regenerate
Rishi Upamanyu, with hands joined together in reverence uttered this
abstract of names (applying to Mahadeva), commencing from the beginning.'

"Upamanyu said, 'I shall adore that great Deity who deserves the
adorations of all creatures, by uttering those names that are celebrated
over all the worlds,--names some of which were uttered by the Grandsire
Brahma, some by the Rishis, and some of which occur in the Vedas and the
Vedangas. Those names have been applied (unto the great Deity) by persons
that are eminent. Those names of him that are, again, true and fraught
with success and are capable of accomplishing all the purposes which the
utterer may have in view, have been applied unto Mahadeva by Tandi after
calling them from the Vedic lore with the aid of his devotion. Indeed,
with those names that have been uttered by many well-known persons of
righteousness and by ascetics conversant with all the spiritual
principles. I shall adore him who is the foremost, who is the first, who
leads to heaven, who is ready to confer benefits upon all creatures, and
who is auspicious. Those names have been heard everywhere in the
universe, having spread from the region of Brahma (where they were
originally invented). All of them are fraught with the element of Truth.
With those names I shall adore him who is Supreme Brahman, who has been
declared (unto the universe) by the Vedas, and who is Eternal. I shall
now tell thee, O chief of Yacht's race those names. Do thou hear them
with rapt attention. Thou art a devoted worshipper of the Supreme Deity.
Do thou worship the illustrious Bhava, distinguishing him above all the
deities. And because thou art devoted to him, I shall therefore, recite
those names in thy hearing. Mahadeva is Eternal Brahman. Persons endued
with Yoga; Yoga's achievements are unable to know in even a hundred
years, the glory and puissance of the great Deity in their entirety.
Verily, the beginning, middle or end of Mahadeva cannot be apprehended by
the very deities. Indeed, when the case is such, who is there O Madhava,
that can recite the attributes of Mahadeva in their entirety? For all
that, I shall through the grace of that illustrious and supreme Deity of
perfect wisdom, extended to me for my devotion to him, recite his
attributes as embodied in an abstract of few words and letters. The
Supreme Lord is incapable of being adored by any one if he does not grant
his permission to the adorer. As regards myself, it is only when I become
fortunate enough to receive his permission that I succeed in adoring him.
I shall indicate only a few names of that great Deity who is without
birth and without destruction, who is the original cause of the universe,
who is endued with the highest Soul, and whose origin is unmanifest.
Hear, O Krishna, a few names, that were uttered by Brahma himself, of
that giver of boons, that adorable deity, that puissant one who has the
universe for his form, and who is possessed of supreme wisdom. These
names that I shall recite are extracted from the ten thousand names that
the great Grandsire had uttered in days of yore, as ghee is extracted
from curds. As gold represents the essence of rocky mountains, as honey
represents the essence of flowers, as Manda represents the extract from
ghee, even so have these names been extracted from and represent the
essence of those ten thousand names that were uttered by Grandsire
Brahma. This abstract of names is capable of cleansing every sin, however
heinous. It possesses the same merit that is attached to the four Vedas.
It should be comprehended with attention by spiritual aspirants and
engraved on the memory. These names fraught with auspiciousness, leading
to advancement, destructive of Rakshasas,[88] and great cleansers should
be imparted to only him that is devoted to the great Lord, to him that
has faith, to him that believes. Unto him that has no faith, him that is
an unbeliever, him that has not subjugated his soul, it should never be
communicated. That creature, O Krishna, who cherishes malice towards the
illustrious Mahadeva who is the original cause of everything, who is the
Supreme Soul, and who is the great Lord, has certainly to go to hell with
all his ancestors before and all his children after him. This abstract of
names that I shall recite to thee is looked upon as Yoga.[89] This is
looked upon as the highest object of meditation. This is that which one
should constantly recite as Japya. This is equivalent to Knowledge. This
is the highest Mystery. If one, even during his last moments, recites it
or hears it recited unto him, one succeeds in attaining to the highest
end. This is holy. This is auspicious, this is fraught with every kind of
benefit. This is the best of all things. Brahma, the Grandsire of all the
universe, having in days of old composed it, assigned to it the foremost
place among all excellent hymns. From that time, this hymn to the
greatness and glory of the high-souled Mahadeva, which is held in the
highest esteem by all the deities, has come to be regarded as the king of
all hymns. This king of all hymns was first conveyed from the region of
Brahman to heaven, the region of the celestials. Tandi then obtained it
from heaven. Hence is it known as the hymn composed by Tandi. From heaven
Tandi brought it down on Earth. It is the most auspicious of all
auspicious things, and is capable of cleansing the heart from all sins
however heinous. O thou of mighty arms, I shall recite to thee that best
of all hymns. This hymn relates to him who is the Veda of the Vedas, and
the most ancient of all ancient objects, to him who is the energy of all
energies, and the penance of all penances; to him who is the most
tranquil of all creatures endued with tranquillity, and who is the
splendour of all splendours; to him who is looked upon as the most
restrained of all creatures that are restrained, and him who is the
intelligence of all creatures endued with intelligence; to him who is
looked upon as the deity of all deities, and the Rishi of all Rishis; to
him who is regarded as the sacrifice of all sacrifices and the most
auspicious of all things fraught with auspiciousness; to him who is the
Rudra of all Rudras and the effulgence of all things endued with
effulgence; to him who is the Yogin of all Yogins, and the cause of all
causes; to him from whom all the worlds start into existence, and unto
whom all the worlds return when they cease to exist; to him who is the
Soul of all existent creatures, and who is called Hara of immeasurable
energy. Hear me recite those thousand and eight names of the great Sarva.
Hearing those names, O foremost of all men, thou shalt be crowned with
fruition in respect of all thy wishes,--Om! thou art Immobile, thou art
Fixed, thou art Puissant, thou art Terrible, thou art Foremost, thou art
boon-giving, and thou art Superior.[90] Thou art the Soul of all
creatures, thou art celebrated over all creatures, thou art all things,
thou art the Creator of all, and thou art Bhava."[91] Thou art the bearer
of matted locks on thy head. Thou wearest animal skins for thy vestments.
Thou wearest a crest of matted hair on thy head like the peacock. Thou
art he who has the whole universe for thy limbs.[92] Thou art the Creator
of all things. Thou art Hara in consequence of thy being the destroyer of
all things. Thou art he that has eyes resembling those of the gazelle.
Thou art the destroyer of all creatures. Thou art the supreme enjoyer of
all things. Thou art that Pravritti whence all actions flow. Thou art
that Nivritti or abstention from acts. Thou art observant of fasts and
vows, thou art Eternal, thou art Unchangeable. Thou art he that residest
in crematoria, thou art the possessor of the six well-known attributes of
Lordship and the rest, thou residest in the heart of every creature, thou
art he that enjoys all things with the senses, thou art the grinder of
all sinful creatures.[93] Thou art he that deserves the salutations of
all, thou art of great feats, thou art he that has penances for his
wealth, thou createst all the elements at thy will, thou concealest thy
real nature by putting on the guise of a lunatic. Thou art the Master of
all the worlds and of all living creatures. Thou art of immeasurable
form, thou art of vast body, thou art of the form of Righteousness, thou
art of great fame, thou art of high Soul, thou art the Soul of all
creatures, thou hast the universe for thy form.[94] Thou art of vast jaws
(for thou swallowest the universe when the time comes for the dissolution
of all things). Thou art the protector of all the lokas (the worlds).
Thou art the soul residing in the inner heart and as such devoid of
ahamkara originating from ignorance[95] and is one and undivided; Thou
art anandam (gladness). Thou art he whose car is borne by mules. Thou art
he that protects Jiva from the thunderbolt of rebirth. Thou art adorable.
Thou art obtained by purity and self-restraint and vows. Thou art again
the refuge of all kinds of vows and observances including purity and
self-restraint.[96] Thou art the celestial artificer that is conversant
with every art. Thou art Self-create (for no one has created thee). Thou
art the beginning of all creatures and things. Thou art Hiranyagarbha,
the Creator of all things. Thou art inexhaustible puissance and
felicity.[97] Thou hast a hundred eyes, thou hast eyes of vast power.
Thou art Soma.[98] Thou art he that causest all righteous creatures
assume shapes of glory for shining in the firmament. Thou art Chandramas,
thou art Surya, thou art the planet Saturn, thou art the descending node
(of the moon), thou art the ascending node, thou art Mangala (Mars), and
thou art Vrihaspati (Jupiter) and Sukra (Venus), thou art Vudha (Mercury)
thou art the worshipper of Atri's wife, thou art he who shot his shaft in
wrath at Sacrifice when Sacrifice fled away from him in the form of a
deer. Thou art sinless.[99] Thou art possessed of penances that have
conferred upon thee the power of creating the universe. Thou art
possessed of penances that have rendered thee capable of destroying the
universe. Thou art high minded (in consequence of thy great liberality
towards thy devotees). Thou fulfillest the wishes of all who resign
themselves to thee. Thou art the maker of the year (for it is thou who
settest the wheel of Time revolving, by assuming the form of the sun and
the planets). Thou art Mantra (in the form of Pranava and other sacred
words and syllables). Thou art the authority for all acts (in the form of
the Vedas and the scriptures). Thou art the highest Penance. Thou art
devoted to Yoga. Thou art he who merges himself in Brahman (by
Yoga-abstraction). Thou art the great seed (being the cause of causes).
Thou art the displayer of what is unmanifest in the manifest form in
which the universe exists. Thou art possessed of infinite might. Thou art
he whose seed is gold.[100] Thou art omniscient, (being as thou art all
things and the great knower). Thou art the cause of all things. Thou art
he that has the seed of action (viz., ignorance and desire) for the means
of sojourning from this world to the other and the other to this.[101]
Thou hast ten arms. Thou hast winkless eyes (for thou seest at all
times). Thou hast a blue throat (in consequence of thy bearing in thy
throat the poison that arose upon churning the ocean and which, if not so
borne, was capable of destroying the universe). Thou art the Lord of Uma.
Thou art the origin of all the infinite forms that occur in the universe.
Thou art he whose superiority is due to thyself. Thou art a hero in might
(in consequence of thy having achieved such grand feats as the quick
destruction of the triple city of the Asuras). Thou art inert matter
(which cannot move unless co-existing with the Soul). Thou art all the
tattwas (subjects of enquiry as counted by the Sankhyas). Thou art the
ordainer and ruler of the tattwas. Thou art the chief of those beings
that wait upon thee and are called Ganas.[102] Thou coverest infinite
space.[103] Thou art Kama, the God of Desire. Thou art conversant with
Mantras (in the sense of knowledge being thy penance).[104] Thou art the
highest Mantra for thou art that philosophy which consists in the
ascertainment of the nature and attributes of the soul (and its
differences from the Non-soul). Thou art the cause of the universe (since
all that exists has sprung from thy Soul). Thou art universal destroyer
(for all that ceases to exist becomes merged unto thee who art as the
unmanifest Brahman). Thou bearest in one of thy hands the calabash, and
in another thou holdest the bow; in another hand thou bearest shafts and
in another thou bearest a skull. Thou bearest the thunder-bolt. Thou art
armed with the hundred-killer.[105] Thou art armed with the sword. Thou
wieldest the battle-axe. Thou art armed with the Sula (trident). Thou art
adorable. Thou host the sacrificial ladle in one of thy hands. Thou art
of beautiful form. Thou art endued with abundant energy. Thou givest in
the most liberal measure all that tends to adorn those that are devoted
to thee. Thou wearest a turban on thy head. Thou art of beautiful face.
Thou art he who swells with splendour and puissance. Thou art he that is
humble and modest. Thou art exceedingly tall. Thou art he who has the
senses for thy rays.[106] Thou art the greatest of preceptors. Thou art
Supreme Brahman (being a state of pure felicitous existence).[107] Thou
art he that took the shape of a jackal (for consoling the Brahmana who,
when insulted by a wealthy Vaisya, had resolved to commit suicide). Thou
art he whose object are all crowned with fruition, of themselves and
without waiting for the puissance (derivable from penances). Thou art one
who bears a bald head (as the sign of the mendicant order). Thou art one
who does good to all creatures. Thou art unborn. Thou hast innumerable
forms. Thou bearest all kinds of fragrance on thy person. The matted
locks on thy head had sucked up the river Ganga when it first fell from
heaven (although they again gave out the waters at the earnest
solicitations of king Bhagiratha). Thou art the giver of sovereignty and
lordship.[108] Thou art a Brahmacharin without having ever fallen away
from the rigid vow of continence. Thou art distinguished for thy sexual
continence. Thou always liest on thy back. Thou hast thy abode in
Puissance.[109] Thou hast three matted locks on thy head. Thou art he
that is clad in rags. Thou art Rudra (in consequence of thy fierceness).
Thou art the celestial generalissimo, and thou art all pervading. Thou
art he that moves about during the day. Thou art he that moves about in
the night.[110] Thou art of fierce wrath. Thou art possessed of dazzling
effulgence (born of Vedic study and penances). Thou art the slayer of the
mighty Asura who had come in the form of an infuriate elephant for
destroying thy sacred city of Varanasi. Thou art the slayer of such
Daityas as become the oppressors of the universe. Thou art Kala or Time
which is the universal destroyer. Thou art the supreme ordainer of the
universe. Thou art a mine of excellent accomplishments. Thou art of the
form of the lion and the tiger. Thou art he that is clad in the skin of
an elephant. Thou art the Yogin who deceives Time by transcending its
irresistible influence. Thou art the original sound.[111] Thou art the
fruition of all desires. Thou art he that is adored in four ways.[112]
Thou art a night-wanderer (like Vetala and others). Thou art he that
wanders in the company of spirits. Thou art he that wanders in the
company of ghostly beings. Thou art the Supreme Lord of even Indra and
the other celestials. Thou art he that hast multiplied himself infinitely
in the form of all existent and non-existent things. Thou art the
upholder of both Mahat and all the innumerable combinations of the five
primal elements. Thou art the primeval Ignorance or Tamas that is known
by the name of Rahu. Thou art without measure and hence infinite. Thou
art the supreme End that is attained by the Emancipate. Thou art fond of
dancing. Thou art he that is always engaged in dancing. Thou art he that
causes others to dance. Thou art the friend of the universe. Thou art he
whose aspect is calm and mild. Thou art endued with penances puissant
enough to create and destroy the universe. Thou art he who binds all
creatures with the bonds of thy illusion. Thou art he that transcends
destruction. Thou art he who dwells on the mount Kailasa. Thou
transcendest all bonds and art unattached in respect of all things, like
Space. Thou art possessed of a thousand arms. Thou art victory. Thou art
that perseverance which is the cause of success or victory. Thou art
without idleness or procrastination that interferes with persevering
activity. Thou art dauntless. Thou art fear, Thou art he who put a stop
to Vali's sacrifice.[113] Thou fulfillest the desires of all thy
devotees. Thou art the destroyer of Daksha's sacrifice. Thou art amiable.
Thou art slightly amiable. Thou art exceedingly fierce and robbest all
creatures of their energy. Thou art the slayer of the Asura Vala. Thou
art always cheerful. Thou art of the form of wealth which is coveted by
all. Thou hast never been vanquished.[114] There is none more adorable
than thou. Thou art he who utters deep roars (in the form of Ocean). Thou
art that which is so deep that no one can measure it (because thou art of
the form of space). Thou art he whose puissance and the might of whose
companions and of the bull have never been measured by anybody. Thou art
the tree of the world (whose roots extend upwards and branches hang
downwards). Thou art the banian.[115] Thou art he that sleeps on a human
leaf when the universe, after dissolution, becomes one infinite expanse
of water. Thou art he that shows compassion to all worshippers assuming
as thou listest, the form of Hari or Hara or Ganesa or Arka or Agni or
Wind, etc. Thou art possessed of teeth that are exceedingly sharp (since
thou art competent to chew innumerable worlds even as one munches nuts
and swallows them speedily). Thou art of vast dimensions in respect of
thy forms. Thou art possessed of a mouth that is hast enough to swallow
the universe at once. Thou art he whose troops are adored
everywhere.[116] Thou art he who dispelled all the fears of the deities
when the prince of elephants had to be captured. Thou art the seed of the
universe. Thou art he who has for his vehicle the same bull that forms
again the device on his banner in battle. Thou hast Agni for thy soul.
Thou art Surya who has green steeds yoked unto his car. Thou art the
friend of Jiva. Thou art he that is conversant with the proper time for
the accomplishment of all religious acts. Thou art he unto whom Vishnu
paid his adorations (for obtaining his celebrated discus). Thou art the
sacrifice being in the form of Vishnu. Thou art the ocean. Thou art the
Barabanala Mare's head that ranges within the ocean, ceaselessly
vomitting fire and drinking the saline waters as if they were sacrificial
butter. Thou art Wind, the friend of Agni. Thou art of tranquil soul like
the ocean when at rest and unstirred by the mildest breeze. Thou art Agni
that drinks the libations of clarified butter poured in sacrifices with
the aid of Mantras. Thou art he whom it is difficult to approach. Thou
art he whose effulgence spreads over the infinite universe. Thou art ever
skilful in battle. Thou art well conversant with the time when one should
engage in battle so that victory may be achieved. Thou art that science
which treats of the motions of heavenly bodies.[117] Thou art of the form
of success or victory. Thou art he whose body is Time (for thy body is
never subject to destruction). Thou art a householder for thou wearest a
tuft of hair on thy head Thou art a Sanyasin for thy head is bald. Thou
wearest matted locks on thy head (being, as thou art, a
Vanaprastha).[118] Thou art distinguished for thy fiery rays (for the
effulgent path by which the righteous proceed is identical with thee).
Thou art he that appears in the firmament in the heart encased in the
body of every creature.[119] Thou art he who enters into the cranium
(brain) of every creature. Thou bearest the wrinkles of age. Thou bearest
the bamboo flute. Thou hast also the tabour. Thou bearest the musical
instrument called Tali. Thou hast the wooden vessel used for husking
grain. Thou art he who covers that illusion which covers Yama.[120] Thou
art an astrologer inasmuch as thy understanding is always directed
towards the motion of the wheel of time which is made up of the
luminaries in the firmament. Thou art Jiva whose understanding is
directed to things that are the result of the attributes of Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas. Thou art that in which all things merge when
dissolution overtakes them. Thou art stable and fixed, there being
nothing in thee that is subject to change or mutation of any kind. Thou
art the Lord of all creatures. Thy arms extend all over the vast
universe. Thou art displayed in innumerable forms that are but fractions
of thyself. Thou pervadest all things.[121] Thou art he that has no mouth
(for thou enjoyest not the objects of thy own creation). Thou art he who
frees thy creatures from the bonds of the world. Thou art easily
attainable.[122] Thou art he that manifested himself with a golden
mail.[123] Thou art he that appears in the phallic emblem. 'Thou art he
that wanders in the forests in quest of fowls and animals. Thou art he
that wanders over the Earth. Thou art, he that is omnipresent. Thou art
the blare that is produced by all the trumpets blown in the three worlds.
Thou art he that has all creatures for his relatives.[124] Thou art of
the form of a snake (for thou art identical with the mighty Naga named
Sesha). Thou art he that lives in mountain caves (like Jaigishavya), or
any other Yogin. Thou art identical with Guha (the celestial
generalissimo). Thou wearest garlands of flowers. Thou art he who enjoys
the happiness that springs from the possession of worldly objects.[125]
Thou art he from whom all creatures have derived their three states of
birth, existence, and destruction. Thou art he that upholds all things
that exist or occur in the three stages of time viz., the Past, the
Present, and the Future. Thou art he that frees creatures from the
effects of all acts belonging to previous lives as well as those
accomplished in the present life and from all the bonds due to Ignorance
and Desire. Thou art he who is the binder or Asura chiefs. Thou art he
who is the slayer of foes in battle.[126] Thou art that which is
attainable by knowledge alone. Thou art Durvasas. Thou art he who is
waited upon and adored by all the righteous. Thou art he who causes the
fall of even Brahma and the others. Thou art he that gives unto all
creatures the just share of joy and grief that each deserves according to
his own acts. Thou art he that is incomparable. Thou art well conversant
with the shares that are given and appropriated in sacrifices.[127] Thou
residest in every place. Thou wanderest everywhere. Thou art he that has
mean vestments.[128] Thou art Vasava. Thou art immortal. Thou art
identical with the Himavat mountains. Thou art the maker of pure gold.
Thou art without acts. Thou upholdest in thyself the fruits of all acts.
Thou art the foremost of all creatures that are regarded as
upholders.[129] Thou art he that has bloody eyes. Thou art he that has
eyes whose vision extends over the infinite universe. Thou art he that
has a car whose wheels are ever victorious. Thou art he that is possessed
of vast learning. Thou art he that accepts thy devotees for thy servants.
Thou art he that restrains and subjugates thy senses. Thou art he that
acts. Thou wearest clothes whose warp and woof are made of snakes. Thou
art Supreme. Thou art he who is the lowest of the celestials.[130] Thou
art he that is well-grown. Thou ownest the musical instrument called
Kahala. Thou art the giver of every wish. Thou art the embodiment of
grace in all the three stages of Time, viz., the Past, the Present, and
the Future. Thou art possessed of might that is always well spent. Thou
art he who had assumed the form of Valarama (the elder brother of
Krishna). Thou art the foremost of all colleted things, being
Emancipation or the highest of all ends to which creatures attain. Thou
art the giver of all things. Thy face is turned towards all directions,
Thou art he from whom diverse creatures have sprung even as all forms
have sprung from space or are modifications or that primal element. Thou
art he who falls into the pit called body.[131] Thou art he that is
helpless (for, falling into the pit constituted by the body, thou canst
not transcend the sorrow that is thy portion). Thou residest in the
firmament of the heart. Thou art exceedingly fierce in form. Thou art the
Deity called Ansu. Thou art the companion of Ansu and art called Aditya.
Thou art possessed of innumerable rays. Thou art endued with dazzling
effulgence. Thou hast the speed of the Wind.[132] Thou art possessed of
speed that is greater than that of the Wind. Thou art possessed of the
speed of the mind. Thou art Nishachara as thou enjoyest all things, being
invested with Ignorance.[133] Thou dwellest in every body. Thou dwellest
with Prosperity as thy companion. Thou art he that imparts knowledge and
instruction. Thou art he who imparts instruction in utter silence. Thou
art he that observes the vow of taciturnity (for thou instructest in
silence). Thou art he who passes out of the body, looking at the
soul.[134] Thou art he that is well adored. Thou art the giver of
thousands (since the lord of all the treasures derived those treasures of
his from thee). Thou art the prince of birds, (being Garuda the son of
Vinata and Kasyapa). Thou art the friend that renders aid. Thou art
possessed of exceeding effulgence (for thy splendour is like that of a
million suns risen together). Thou art the Master of all created beings.
Thou art he who provokes the appetites. Thou art the deity of Desire.
Thou art of the form of lovely women that are coveted by all. Thou art
the tree of the world. Thou art the Lord of Treasures. Thou art the giver
of fame. Thou art the Deity that distributes unto all creatures the
fruits (in the form of joys and griefs) of their acts. Thou art thyself
those fruits which thou distributest. Thou art the most ancient (having
existed from a time when there was no other existent thing). Thou art
competent to cover with a single footstep of thine all the three worlds.
Thou art Vamana (the dwarf) who deceived the Asura chief Vali (and
depriving him of his sovereignty restored it unto Indra). Thou art the
Yogin crowned with success (like Sanatkumara and others). Thou art a
great Rishi (like Vasishtha and others). Thou art one whose objects are
always crowned with success (like Rishava or Dattatreya). Thou art a
Sanyasin (like Yajnavalkya and others). Thou art he that is adorned with
the marks of the mendicant order. Thou art he that is without such
marks.[135] Thou art he that transcends the usages of the mendicant
order. Thou art he that assures all creatures from every sort of fear.
Thou art without any passions thyself (so that glory and humiliation are
alike to thee). Thou art he that is called the celestial generalissimo.
Thou art that Visakha who took his rise from the body of the celestial
generalissimo when Indra hurled his thunder-bolt at him. Thou art
conversant with the sixty tattwas or heads of enquiry in the universe.
Thou art the Lord of the senses (for these achieve their respective
functions guided by thee). Thou art he that is armed with the
thunder-bolt (and that rives the mountains). Thou art infinite. Thou art
the stupefier of Daitya ranks in the field of battle. Thou art he that
moves his car in circles among his own ranks and that makes similar
circles among the ranks of his foes and who conies back safe and sound
after devastating then. Thou art he that is conversant with the lowest
depth of the world's ocean (in consequence of thy knowledge of Brahman).
Thou art he called Madhu (who has founded the race in which Krishna has
taken his birth). Thou hast eyes whose colour resembles that of honey.
Thou art he that has taken birth after Vrihaspati.[136] Thou art he that
does the acts which Adhyaryus have to do in sacrifices. Thou art he who
is always adored by persons whatever their modes of life. Thou art
devoted to Brahman. Thou wanderest amongst the habitations of men in the
world (in consequence of thy being a mendicant). Thou art he that
pervadest all beings. Thou art he that is conversant with truth. Thou
knowest and guidest every heart. Thou art he that overspreads the whole
universe. Thou art he that collects or stores the good and bad acts of
all creatures in order to award them the fruits thereof Thou art he that
lives during even the night that follows the universal dissolution. Thou
art the protector wielding the bow called Pinaka. Thou residest in even
the Daityas that are the marks at which shootest thy arrows. Thou art the
author of prosperity. Thou art the mighty ape Hanuman that aided Vishnu
in the incarnation of Rama in his expedition against Ravana. Thou art the
lord of those Ganas that are thy associates, Thou art each member of
those diverse Ganas. Thou art he that gladdens all creatures. Thou art
the enhancer of the joys of all.[137] Thou takest away the sovereignty
and prosperity of even such high beings as Indra and others. Thou art the
universal slayer in the form of Death. Thou art he that resides in the
four and sixty Kalas. Thou art very great. Thou art the Grandsire (being
the sire of the great sire of all). Thou art the supreme phallic emblem
that is adored by both deities and Asuras. Thou art of agreeable and
beautiful features. Thou art he who presides over the variety of
evidences and tendencies for action and non-action. Thou art the lord of
vision. Thou art the Lord of Yoga (in consequence of thy withdrawing all
the senses into the heart and combining them together in that place).
Thou art he that upholds the Krita and the other ages (by causing them to
run ceaselessly). Thou art the Lord of seeds (in consequence of thy being
the giver of the fruits of all acts good and bad). Thou art the original
cause of such seeds. Thou actest in the ways that have been pointed out
in the scriptures beginning with those that treat of the Soul. Thou art
he in whom reside might and the other attributes. Thou art the
Mahabharata and other histories of the kind. Thou art the treatises
called Mimansa. Thou art Gautama (the founder of the science of
dialectics). Thou art the author of the great treatise on Grammar that
has been named after the Moon. Thou art he who chastises his foes. Thou
art he whom none can chastise. Thou art he who is sincere in respect of
all his religious acts and observances. Thou art he that becomes obedient
to those that are devoted to thee. Thou art he that is capable of
reducing others to subjection. Thou art he who foments quarrels among the
deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who has created the four and ten
worlds (beginning with Bhu). Thou art the protector and cherisher of all
Beings commencing from Brahma and ending with the lowest forms of
vegetable life (like grass and straw). Thou art the Creator of even the
five original elements. Thou art he that never enjoys anything (for thou
art always unattached). Thou art free from deterioration. Thou art the
highest form of felicity. Thou art a deity proud of his might. Thou art
Sakra. Thou art the chastisement that is spoken of in treatises on
morality and is inflicted on offenders. Thou art of the form of that
tyranny which prevails over the world. Thou art of pure Soul. Thou art
stainless (being above faults of every kind). Thou art worthy of
adoration. Thou art the world that appears and disappears ceaselessly.
Thou art he whose grace is of the largest measure. Thou art he that has
good dreams. Thou art a mirror in which the universe is reflected. Thou
art he that has subjugated all internal and external foes. Thou art the
maker of the Vedas. Thou art the maker of those declarations that are
contained in the Tantras and the Puranas and that are embodied in
language that is human.[138] Thou art possessed of great learning. Thou
art the grinder of foes in battle. Thou art he that resides in the awful
clouds that appear at the time of the universal dissolution. Thou art
most terrible (in consequence of the dissolution of the universe that
thou bringest about). Thou art he who succeeds in bringing all persons
and all things into thy subjection. Thou art the great Destroyer. Thou
art he that has fire for his energy. Thou art he whose energy is mightier
than fire. Thou art the Yuga-fire that consumes all things. Thou art he
that is capable of being gratified by means of sacrificial libations.
Thou art water and other liquids that are poured in sacrifices with the
aid of Mantras. Thou art in the form of the Deity of Righteousness, the
distributor of the fruits that attach to acts good and bad. Thou art the
giver of felicity. Thou art always endued with effulgence. Thou art of
the form of fire. Thou art of the complexion of the emerald. Thou art
always present in the phallic emblem. Thou art the source of blessedness.
Thou art incapable of being baffled by anything in the prosecution of
your objects. Thou art the giver of blessings. Thou art of the form of
blessedness. Thou art he unto whom is given a share of sacrificial
offerings. Thou art he who distributes unto each his share of that is
offered in sacrifices. Thou art endued with great speed. Thou art he that
is dissociated from all things. Thou art he that is possessed of the
mightiest limb. Thou art he that is employed in the act of generation.
Thou art of a dark complexion, (being of the form of Vishnu). Thou art of
a white complexion (being of the form of Samva, the son of Krishna). Thou
art the senses of all embodied creatures. Thou art possessed of vast
feet. Thou hast vast hands. Thou art of vast body. Thou art endued with
wide extending fame. Thou hast a vast head.[139] Thou art of vast
measurements. Thou art of vast vision. Thou art the home of the darkness
of ignorance. Thou art the Destroyer of the Destroyer. Thou art possessed
of vast years. Thou hast vast lips. Thou art he that has vast cheeks.
Thou hast a vast nose. Thou art of a vast throat. Thou hast a vast neck.
Thou art he that tears the bond of body.[140] Thou hast a vast chest.
Thou hast a vast bosom. Thou art the inner soul which resides in all
creatures. Thou hast a deer on thy lap. Thou art he from whom innumerable
worlds hang down like fruits hanging down from a tree. Thou art he who
stretches his lips at the time of the universal dissolution for
swallowing the universe. Thou art the ocean of milk. Thou hast vast
teeth. Thou hast vast jaws. Thou hast a vast bristle.[141] Thou hast hair
of infinite length. Thou hast a vast stomach. Thou hast matted locks of
vast length. Thou art ever cheerful. Thou art of the form of grace. Thou
art of the form of belief. Thou art he that has mountains for his bow (or
weapons in battle). Thou art he that is full of affection to all
creatures like a parent towards his offspring. Thou art he that has no
affection. Thou art unvanquished. Thou art exceedingly devoted to (Yoga)
contemplation.[142] Thou art of the form of the tree of the world.[143]
Thou art he that is indicated by the tree of the world.[144] Thou art
never satiated when eating (because of thy being of the form of fire, for
of all elements, fire is never satiated with the quantity offered it for
consumption). Thou art he that has the Wind for thy vehicle for going
from place to place (in consequence of thy identity with fire). Thou art
he that rangest over hills and little eminences. Thou art he that has his
residence on the mountains of Meru. Thou art the chief of the celestials.
Thou hast the Atharvans for thy head. Thou hast the Samans for thy mouth.
Thou hast the thousand Richs for thy immeasurable eyes. Thou hast the
Yajushes for thy feet and hands.[145] Thou art the Upanishads. Thou art
the entire body of rituals (occurring in the scriptures). Thou art all
that is mobile. Thou art he whose solicitations are never unfulfilled.
Thou art he who is always inclined to grace. Thou art he that is of
beautiful form. Thou art of the form of the good that one does to
another. Thou art that which is dear. Thou art he that always advances
towards thy devotees (in proportion as these advance for meeting thee).
Thou art gold and other precious metals that are held dear by all. Thy
effulgence is like that of burnished gold. Thou art the navel (of the
universe). Thou art he that makes the fruits of sacrifices grow (for the
benefit of those that perform sacrifices to thy glory). Thou art of the
form of that faith and devotion which the righteous have in respect of
sacrifices. Thou art the artificer of the universe. Thou art all that is
immobile (in the form of mountains and other inert objects). Thou art the
two and ten stages of life through which a person passes.[146] Thou art
he that causes fright (by assuming the intermediate states between the
ten enumerated). Thou art the beginning of all things. Thou art he that
unites Jiva with Supreme Brahman through Yoga. Thou art identifiable with
that Yoga which causes such a union between Jiva and Supreme Brahman.
Thou art unmanifest (being the deepest stupefaction). Thou art the
presiding deity of the fourth age (in consequence of thy identity with
lust and wrath and cupidity and other evil passions that flow from that
deity).[147] Thou art eternal Time (because of thy being of the form of
that ceaseless succession of birth and death that goes on in the
universe). Thou art of the form of the Tortoise.[148] Thou art worshipped
by the Destroyer himself. Thou livest in the midst of associates. Thou
admittest thy devotees as members of thy Gana. Thou hast Brahma himself
for the driver of thy car. Thou sleepest on ashes.[149] Thou protectest
the universe with ashes.[150] Thou art he whose body is made of
ashes.[151] Thou art the tree that grants the fruition of all wishes.
Thou art of the form of those that constitute thy Gana. Thou art the
protector of the four and ten regions. Thou transcendent all the regions.
Thou art full, (there being no deficiency). Thou art adored by all
creatures. Thou art white (being pure and stainless). Thou art he that
has his body, speech and mind perfectly stainless. Thou art he who has
attained to that purity of existence which is called Emancipation. Thou
art he who is incapable of being stained by impurity of any kind. Thou
art he who has been attained to by the great preceptors of old. Thou
residest in the form of Righteousness or duly in the four modes of life.
Thou art that Righteousness which is of the form of rites and sacrifices.
Thou art of the form of that skill which is possessed by the celestial
artificer of the universe. Thou art he who is adored as the primeval form
of the universe. Thou art of vast arms. Thy lips are of a coppery hue.
Thou art of the form of the vast waters that are contained in the Ocean.
Thou art exceedingly stable and fixed (being of the form of mountains and
hills). Thou art Kapila. Thou art brown. Thou art all the hues whose
mixture produces white. Thou art the period of life. Thou art ancient.
Thou art recent. Thou art a Gandharva. Thou art the mother of the
celestials in the form of Aditi (or the mother of all things, in the form
of Earth). Thou art Garuda, the prince of birds, born of Vinata by
Kasyapa, otherwise called Tarkshya. Thou art capable of being
comprehended with ease. Thou art of excellent and agreeable speech. Thou
art he that is armed with the battle-axe. Thou art he that is desirous of
victory. Thou art he that assists others in the accomplishment of their
designs.[152] Thou art an excellent friend.[153] Thou art he that bears a
Vina made of two hollow gourds. Thou art of terrible wrath (which thou
displayest at the time of the universal dissolution). Thou ownest for thy
offspring, beings higher than men and deities (viz., Brahma and Vishnu).
Thou art of the form of that Vishnu who floats on the waters after the
universal dissolution. Thou devourest all things with great ferocity.
Thou art he that procreates offspring. Thou art family and race,
continuing from generation to generation. Thou art the blare that a
bamboo flute gives out. Thou art faultless. Thou art he every limb of
whose body is beautiful. Thou art full of illusion. Thou dost good to
others without expecting any return. Thou art Wind. Thou art Fire. Thou
art the bonds of the worlds which bind Jiva. Thou art the creator of
those bonds. Thou art the tearer of such bonds. Thou art he that dwells
with even the Daityas (who are the foes of all sacrifices). Thou dwellest
with those that are the foes of all acts (and that have abandoned all
acts). Thou art of large teeth, and thou art of mighty weapons. Thou art
he that has been greatly censured. Thou art he that stupefied the Rishis
dwelling in the Daruka forest. Thou art he that did good unto even thy
detractors, viz., those Rishis residing in the Daruka forest. Thou art he
who dispels all fears and who dispelling all the fears of those Rishis
gave them Emancipation. Thou art he that has no wealth (in consequence of
his inability to procure even his necessary wearing apparel). Thou art
the lord of the celestials. Thou art the greatest of the gods (in
consequence of thy being adored by even Indra and others that are
regarded as the highest of the celestials). Thou art an object of
adoration with even Vishnu. Thou art the slayer of those that are the
foes of the deities. Thou art he that resides (in the form of the snake
Sesha) in the nethermost region.[154] Thou art invisible but capable of
being comprehended, even as the wind which though invisible is perceived
by every body. Thou art he whose knowledge extends to the roots of
everything and unto whom all things, even in their inner nature, are
known. Thou art the object that is enjoyed by him that enjoys it. Thou
art he among the eleven Rudras who is called Ajaikapat. Thou art the
sovereign of the entire universe. Thou art of the form of all Jivas in
the universe (in consequence of thy being covered by the three well-known
attributes of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas). Thou art he that is not subject
to those three attributes. Thou art he that transcends all attributes and
is a state of pure existence which is incapable of being described with
the aid of any adjective that language can yield. Thou art the prince of
physicians called Dhanwantari. Thou art a comet (in consequence of the
calamities that flow from thee unto the sinful). Thou art the celestial
generalissimo called Skanda. Thou art the king of the Yakshas, called
Kuvera, who is thy inseparable associate and who is the Lord of all
treasures in the world. Thou art Dhatri. Thou art Sakra. Thou art Vishnu.
Thou art Mitra. Thou art Tashtri (the celestial artificer). Thou art the
Pole Star. Thou art he that upholds all things. Thou art he called
Prabhava amongst the Vasus. Thou art the wind which is capable of going
everywhere (being the Sutra-atma that connects all things in the universe
with a thread). Thou art Aryaman. Thou art Savitri. Thou art Ravi. Thou
art that ancient king of great celebrity known by the name of Ushangu.
Thou art he who protects all creatures in diverse ways. Thou art
Mandhatri (because of thy competence to gratify all creatures). Thou art
he from whom all creatures start into life. Thou art he who exists in
diverse form. Thou art he who causes the diverse hues to exist in the
universe. Thou art he who upholds all desires and all attributes (because
of these flowing from thee). Thou art he who has the lotus on thy
navel.[155] Thou art he within whose womb are innumerable mighty
creatures. Thou art of face as beautiful as the moon. Thou art wind. Thou
art fire. Thou art possessed of exceeding might. Thou art endued with
tranquillity of soul. Thou art old. Thou art he that is known with the
aid of Righteousness.[156] Thou art Lakshmi. Thou art the maker of the
field of those actions (by which persons adore the supreme Deity). Thou
art he who lives in the field of action. Thou art the soul of the field
of action. Thou art the medicine or provoker of the attributes of
sovereignty and the others.[157] All things lie in thee (for, as the
Srutis declare, all things becomes one in thee, thyself being of the
nature of that unconsciousness which exhibits itself in dreamless
slumber). Thou art the lord of all creatures endued with life-breaths.
Thou art the god of the gods. Thou art he who is attached to felicity.
Thou art Sat (in the form of cause). Thou art Asat (in the form of
effect). Thou art he who possesses the best of all things. Thou art he
who resides on the mountains of Kailasa. Thou art he who repairs to the
mountains of Himavat. Thou washest away all things besides thee like a
mighty current washing away trees and other objects standing on its
banks. Thou art the maker of Pushkara and other large lakes and pieces of
natural water. Thou art possessed of knowledge of infinite kinds. Thou
art the giver of infinite blessings. Thou art a merchant (who conveys the
goods of this country to that country and brings the goods of that
country to this for the convenience of human beings). Thou art a
carpenter. Thou art the tree (of the world that supplies the timber for
thy axe). Thou art the tree called Vakula (Mimusops Elengi, Linn.) Thou
art the sandal-wood tree (Santalum album, Linn.). Thou art the tree
called Chcchada (Alstonia Scholaris, syn Echitis, Scholaris, Roxb.). Thou
art he whose neck is very strong. Thou art he whose shoulder joint is
vast. Thou art not restless (but endued with steadiness in all thy acts
and in respect of all thy faculties). Thou art the principal herbs and
plants with their produce (in the form of rice and wheat and the other
varieties of grain). Thou art he that grants success upon others in
respect of the objects upon which they bestow their heart. Thou art all
the correct conclusions in respect of both the Vedas and Grammar.[158]
Thou art he who utters leonine roars. Thou art endued with leonine fangs.
Thou ridest on the back of a lion for performing thy journeys. Thou
ownest a car that is drawn by a lion. Thou art he called the truth of
truth.[159] Thou art he whose dish or plate is constituted by the
Destroyer of the universe.[160] Thou art always engaged in seeking the
good of the worlds. Thou art he who rescues all creatures from distress
(and leads them to the felicity of Emancipation). Thou art the bird
called Saranga. Thou art a new (Young) swan. Thou art he who is displayed
in beauty in consequence of the crest thou bearest on thy head (like the
cock or the peacock). Thou art he who protects the place where assemblies
of the wise sit for dispensing justice. Thou art the abode of all
creatures. Thou art the cherisher of all creatures. Thou art Day and
Night (which are the constituent elements of Eternity). Thou art he that
is without fault and therefore, never censured. Thou art the upholder of
all creatures. Thou art the refuge of all creatures. Thou art without
birth. Thou art existent. Thou art ever fruitful. Thou art endued with
Dharana and Dhyana and Samadhi. Thou art the steed Uchchaisravas. Thou
art the giver of food. Thou art he who upholds the life-breaths of living
creatures. Thou art endued with patience. Thou art possessed of
intelligence. Thou art endued with exertion and cleverness. Thou art
honoured by all. Thou art the giver of the fruits of Righteousness and
sin. Thou art the cherisher of the senses (for the senses succeed in
performing their respective functions in consequence of thee that
presidest over them). Thou art the lord of all the luminaries. Thou art
all collections of objects. Thou art he whose vestments are made of
cowhides. Thou art he who dispels the grief of his devotees. Thou hast a
golden arm. Thou art he who protects the bodies of Yogins who seek to
enter their own selves. Thou art he who has reduced to nothingness all
his foes.[161] Thou art he the measure of whose gladness is very great.
Thou art he who achieved victory over the deity of desire that is
irresistible. Thou art he who has subjugated his senses. Thou art the
note called Gandhara in the musical octave. Thou art he who has an
excellent and beautiful home (in consequence of its being placed upon the
delightful mountains of Kailasa). Thou art he who is ever attached to
penances. Thou art of the form of cheerfulness and contentment. Thou art
he called vast or infinite.[162] Thou art he in whose honour the foremost
of hymns has been composed. Thou art he whose dancing is characterised by
vast strides and large leaps. Thou art he who is adored with reverence by
the diverse tribes of Apsaras. Thou art he who owns a vast standard
(bearing the device of the bull). Thou art the mountains of Meru. Thou
art he who roves among all the summits of that great mountain. Thou art
so mobile that it is very difficult to seize thee. Thou art capable of
being explained by preceptors to disciples, although thou art incapable
of being described in words. Thou art of the form of that instruction
which preceptors impart to disciples. Thou art he that can perceive all
agreeable scents simultaneously or at the same instant of time. Thou art
of the form of the porched gates of cities and palaces. Thou art of the
form of the moats and ditches that surround fortified towns and give the
victory to the besieged garrison. Thou art the Wind. Thou art of the form
of fortified cities and towns encompassed by walls and moats. Thou art
the prince of all winged creatures, (being, as thou art, of the form of
Garuda). Thou art he who multiplies the creation by union with the
opposite sexes. Thou art the first of all in respect of virtues and
knowledge. Thou art superior to even him who is the first of all in
virtues and knowledge. Thou transcendest all the virtue and knowledge.
Thou art eternal and immutable as also dependent on thyself. Thou art the
master and protector of the deities and Asuras. Thou art the master and
protector of all creatures. Thou art he who wears a coat of mail. Thou
art he whose arms are competent to grind all foes. Thou art an object of
adoration with even him who is called Suparvan in heaven.[163] Thou art
he who grants the power of bearing or upholding all things.[164] Thou art
thyself capable of bearing all things. Thou art fixed and steady (without
being at all unstable). Thou art white or pure (being, as thou art,
without any stain or blot). Thou bearest the trident that is competent to
destroy (all things).[165] Thou art the grantor of bodies or physical
forms unto those that constantly revolve in the universe of birth and
death. Thou art more valuable than wealth. Thou art the conduct or way of
the righteous (in the form of goodness and courtesy). Thou art he who had
torn the head of Brahma after due deliberation (and not impelled by mere
wrath). Thou art he who is marked with all those auspicious marks that
are spoken of in the sciences of palmistry and phrenology and other
branches of knowledge treating of the physical frame as the indicator of
mental peculiarities. Thou art that wooden bar which is called the Aksha
of a car and, therefore, art thou he who is attached to the car
represented by the body. Thou art attached to all things (in consequence
of thy pervading all things as their soul). Thou art endued with very
great might, being as thou art a hero of heroes. Thou art the Veda. Thou
art the Smritis, the Itihasas, the Puranas, and other scriptures. Thou
art the illustrious deity of every sacred shrine. Thou art he who has the
Earth for his car. Thou art the inert elements that enter into the
composition of every creature. Thou art he who imparts life into every
combination of those inert element. Thou art the Pranava and other sacred
Mantras that instil life into dead matter. Thou art he that casts
tranquil glances. Thou art exceedingly harsh (in consequence of thy being
the destroyer of all things). Thou art he in whom are innumerable
precious attributes and possessions. Thou hast a body that is red. Thou
art he who has all the vast oceans as so many ponds filled for thy
drinking.[166] Thou art the root of the tree of the world. Thou art
exceedingly beautiful and shinest with surpassing grandeur. Thou art of
the form of ambrosia or nectar. Thou art both cause and effect. Thou art
an ocean of penances (being as thou art a great Yogin). Thou art he that
desirous of ascending to the highest state of existence. Thou art he that
has already attained to that state. Thou art he who is distinguished for
the purity of his conduct and acts and observances. Thou art he who
possessed of great fame (in consequence of the Righteousness of his
behaviour). Thou art the ornament of armies (being as thou art of the
form of prowess and courage), Thou art he who is adorned with celestial
ornaments. Thou art Yoga. Thou art he from whom flow eternal time
measured by Yugas and Kalpas. Thou art he who conveys all creatures from
place.[167] Thou art of the form of Righteousness and sin and their
intermixture (such as are displayed in the successive Yugas). Thou art
great and formless. Thou art he who slew the mighty Asura that had
approached against the sacred city of Varanasi in the form of an
infuriate elephant of vast proportions. Thou art of the form of death.
Thou givest to all creatures such fruition of their wishes as accords
with their merits. Thou art approachable. Thou art conversant with all
things that are beyond the ken of the senses. Thou art conversant with
the Tattwas (and therefore, thoroughly fixed). Thou art he who
incessantly shines in beauty. Thou wearest garlands that stretch down
from thy neck to the feet. Thou art that Hara who has the Moon for his
beautiful eye. Thou art the salt ocean of vast expanse. Thou art the
first three Yugas (viz., Krita, Treta, and Dwapara). Thou art he whose
appearance is always fraught with advantage to others. Thou art he who
has three eyes (in the form of the scriptures, the preceptor, and
meditation). Thou art he whose forms are exceedingly subtile (being as
thou art the subtile forms of the primal elements). Thou art he whose
ears are bored for wearing jewelled Kundalas. Thou art the bearer of
matted locks. Thou art the point (in the alphabet) which indicates the
nasal sound. Thou art the two dots i.e., Visarga (in the Sanskrit
alphabet which indicate the sound of the aspirated H). Thou art possessed
of an excellent face. Thou art the shaft that is shot by the warrior for
encompassing the destruction of his foe. Thou art all the weapons that
are used by warriors. Thou art endued with patience capable of bearing
all things. Thou art he whose knowledge has arisen from the cessation of
all physical and mental functions.[168] Thou art he who has become
displayed as Truth in consequence of the cessation of all other
faculties. Thou art that note which, arising from the region called
Gandhara, is exceedingly sweet to the ear. Thou art he who is armed with
the mighty bow (called Pinaka). Thou art he who is the understanding and
the desires that exist in all creatures, besides being the supreme
upholder of all beings. Thou art he from whom all acts flow. Thou art
that wind which rises at the time of the universal dissolution and which
is capable of churning the entire universe even as the staff in the hands
of the dairy-maid churns the milk in the milkpot. Thou art he that is
full. Thou art he that sees all things. Thou art the sound that arises
from slapping one palm against another. Thou art he the palm of whose
hand serves as the dish or plate whence to take his food. Thou art he who
is possessed of an adamantine body. Thou art exceedingly great. Thou art
of the form of an umbrella. Thou art he who has an excellent umbrella.
Thou art well-known to be identical with all creatures. Thou art he who
having put forth three feet covered all the universe with two and wanted
space for the remaining one. Thou art he whose head is bald. Thou art he
whose form is exceedingly ugly and fierce. Thou art he who has undergone
infinite modifications and become all things in the universe. Thou art he
who bears the well-known badge of Sanyasa, viz., the stick. Thou art he
who has a Kunda. Thou art he who is incapable of being attained to by
means of acts. Thou art he who is identical with the green-eyed king of
beasts (viz., the lion). Thou art of the form of all the points of the
compass. Thou art he who is armed with the thunder. Thou art he who has a
hundred tongues. Thou art he who has a thousand feet and thousand
heads.[169] Thou art the lord and chief of the celestials. Thou art he
that is made up of all the gods. Thou art the great Master or preceptor.
Thou art he who has a thousand arms. Thou art he who is competent to
obtain the fruition of every wish. Thou art he whose protection is sought
by every one. Thou art he who is the creator of all the worlds. Thou art
he who is the great cleanser of all from every kind of sin, in the form
of shrines and sacred waters. Thou art he who has three high
Mantras.[170] Thou art the youngest son of Aditi and Kasyapa, (being in
the form of the dwarf who is otherwise known by the name of Upendra and
who beguiled the Asura Vali of his lordship of the three worlds and
restored it to the chief of the celestials). Thou art both black and
tawny (being of the form which is known as Hari-Hara). Thou art the maker
of the Brahmana's rod.[171] Thou art armed with the hundred-killer, the
noose, and the dart. Thou art he that took his birth within the primeval
lotus.

Thou art he who is endued with a vast womb. Thou art he who has the Vedas
in his womb. Thou art he who takes his rise from that infinite waste of
waters which succeeds the dissolution of the universe. Thou art he who is
endued with rays of effulgent light. Thou art the creator of the Vedas.
Thou art he who studies the Vedas. Thou art he who is conversant with the
meaning of the Vedas. Thou art devoted to Brahman. Thou art the refuge of
all persons devoted to Brahman. Thou art of infinite forms. Thou art the
bearer of innumerable bodies. Thou art endued with irresistible
prowess.[172] Thou art the soul or nature that transcends the three
universal attributes (of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas). Thou art the lord of
all Jivas. Thou art endued with the speed of the wind. Thou art possessed
of the fleetness of the mind. Thou art always smeared with sandal-paste.
Thou art the end of the stalk of the primeval lotus.[173] Thou art he who
brought the celestial cow Surabhi down from a superior station to an
inferior one by denouncing a curse upon her.[174] Thou art that Brahma
who was unable to see thy end. Thou art adorned with a large wreath of
Karnikara flowers. Thou art adorned with a diadem of blue gems. Thou art
the wielder of the bow called Pinaka. Thou art the master of that
knowledge which treats of Brahman.[175] Thou art he who has subjugated
his senses by the aid of thy knowledge of Brahman. Thou art he who
bearest Ganga on thy head.[176] Thou art the husband of Uma, the daughter
of Himavat. Thou art mighty (in consequence of thy having assumed the
form of the vast Boar for raising the submerged Earth). Thou art he who
protects the universe by assuming diverse incarnations. Thou art worthy
of adoration. Thou art that primeval Being with the equine head who
recited the Vedas with a thundering voice. Thou art he whose grace is
very great. Thou art the great subjugator. Thou art he who has slain all
his foes (in the form of passions). Thou art both white and tawny (being
as thou art half male and half female).[177] Thou art possessed of a body
whose complexion is like that of gold.[178] Thou art he that is of the
form of pure joy, (being, as thou art, above the five sheathes which the
Jiva consists of, viz., the Anna-maya, the Prana-maya, the Mano-maya, the
Vijnana-maya, and the Ananda-maya ones). Thou art of a restrained soul.
Thou art the foundation upon which rests that Ignorance which is called
Pradhana and which, consisting of the three attributes of Sattwa, Rajas,
and Tamas is the cause whence the universe has sprung. Thou art he whose
faces are turned to every direction.[179] Thou art he who has three eyes
(in the forms of the Sun, the Moon, and Fire). Thou art he who is
superior to all creatures (in consequence of thy righteousness whose
measure is the greatest). Thou art the soul of all mobile beings. Thou
art of the form of the subtile soul (which is incapable of being
perceived). Thou art the giver of immortality in the form of Emancipation
as the fruit of all acts of righteousness achieved by creatures without
the desire of fruits.[180] Thou art the preceptor of even those that are
the gods of the gods. Thou art Vasu, the son of Aditi. Thou art he who is
endued with innumerable rays of light, who brings forth the universe, and
who is of the form of that Soma which is drunk in sacrifices. Thou art
Vyasa, the author of the Puranas and other sacred histories. Thou art the
creations of Vyasa's brain (because of thy being identical with the
Puranas and other sacred histories) both abridged and unabridged. Thou
art the sum total of Jivas. Thou art the Season. Thou art the Year. Thou
art the Month. Thou art the Fortnight. Thou art those sacred Days that
end or conclude these periods. Thou art the Kalas. Thou art the Kashthas.
Thou art the Lavas. Thou art the Matras. Thou art the Muhurtas and Days
and Nights. Thou art the Kshanas.[181] Thou art the soil upon which the
tree of the universe stands. Thou art the seed of all creatures [being of
the form of that Unmanifest Chaitanya (consciousness) endued with Maya or
illusion whence all creatures spring]. Thou art Mahattatwa. Thou art the
sprout of Jiva, (being of the form of Consciousness which springs up
after Mahattatwa). Thou art Sat or Effect. Thou art Asat or Cause. Thou
art Manifest (being seizable by the senses). Thou art the Father. Thou
art the Mother. Thou art the Grandfather. Thou art the door to Heaven
(because of thy identity with Penances). Thou art the door of the
generation of all creatures (because of thy identity with desire). Thou
art the door of Emancipation (because of thy identity with the absence of
Desire which alone can lead to the merging into Brahman). Thou art those
acts of righteousness which lead to the felicity of heaven. Thou art
Nirvana (or that cessation of individual or separate existence which is
Emancipation). Thou art the gladdener (who gives all kinds of joy to
every creature). Thou art that region of Truth (to which they that are
foremost in righteousness attain). Thou art superior to even that region
of Truth which is attainable by the righteous. Thou art he who is the
creator of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who is the refuge
of both the deities and the Asuras. Thou art the preceptor of both the
deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the form of both Vrihaspati
and Sukra). Thou art he who is ever victorious. Thou art he who is ever
worshipped by the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who guides the
deities and the Asuras even as the Mahamatra guides the elephant. Thou
art the refuge of all the deities and the Asuras. Thou art he who is the
chief of both the deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the form
of both India and Virochana). Thou art he who is the leader in battle of
both the deities and the Asuras (being as thou art of the form of
Karttikeya and Kesi, the leaders of the celestial and the Daitya armies).
Thou art he who transcends the senses and shines by himself. Thou art of
the form of the celestial Rishis like Narada and others. Thou art the
grantor of boons unto the deities and Asuras (in the form of Brahman and
Rudra). Thou art he who rules the hearts of the deities and the Asuras.
Thou art he into whom the universe enters (when it is dissolved). Thus
art the refuge of even him who is the ruler of the hearts of both the
deities and the Asuras. Thou art he whose body is made up of all the
deities.[182] Thou art he who has no Being superior to thee of whom to
think. Thou art he who is the inner soul of the deities. Thou art he who
has sprung from his own self. Thou art of the form of immobile things.
Thou art he who covers the three worlds with three steps of his. Thou art
possessed of great learning. Thou art stainless. Thou art he who is freed
from the quality of Rajas. Thou art he who transcends destruction. Thou
art he in whose honour hymns should be sung. Thou art the master of the
irresistible elephant represented by Time. Thou art of the form of that
lord of Tigers who is worshipped in the country of the Kalingas.[183]
Thou art he who is called the lion among the deities (in consequence of
the pre-eminence of thy prowess). Thou art he who is the foremost of men.
Thou art endued with great wisdom. Thou art he who first takes a share of
the offerings in sacrifice. Thou art imperceptible. Thou art the
sum-total of all the deities. Thou art he in whom penances predominate.
Thou art always in excellent Yoga. Thou art auspicious. Thou art armed
with the thunder-bolt. Thou art the source whence the weapons called
Prasas have taken their origin. Thou art he whom thy devotees attain to
in diverse ways. Thou art Guha (the celestial generalissimo). Thou art
the supreme limit of felicity.[184] Thou art identical with thy creation.
Thou art he who rescues thy creatures from death (by granting them
Emancipation). Thou art the cleanser of all including Brahma himself.
Thou art of the form of bulls and other horned animals. Thou art he who
is fond of mountain summits. Thou art the planet Saturn. Thou art Kuvera,
the chief of the Yakshas. Thou art complete faultlessness. Thou art he
who inspires gladness. Thou art all the celestials united together. Thou
art the cessation of all things. Thou art all the duties that appertain
to all the modes of life. Thou art he who has an eye on his forehead.
Thou art he who sports with the universe as his marble ball. Thou art of
the form of deer. Thou art endued with the energy that is of the form of
knowledge and penance. Thou art the lord of all immobile things (in the
form of Himavat and Meru). Thou art he who has subjugated his senses by
various regulations and vows. Thou art he whose objects have all been
fulfilled. Thou art identical with Emancipation. Thou art different from
him whom we worship. Thou hast truth for thy penances. Thou art of a pure
heart. Thou art he who presides over all vows and fasts (in consequence
of thy being the giver of their fruits). Thou art the highest (being of
the form of Turiya). Thou art Brahman. Thou art the highest refuge of the
devotees. Thou art he who transcends all bonds (being Emancipate). Thou
art freed from the linga body. Thou art endued with every kind of
prosperity. Thou art he who enhances the prosperity of thy devotees. Thou
art that which is incessantly undergoing changes.'

"I have thus, 'O Krishna, hymned the praises of the illustrious Deity by
reciting his names in the order of their importance. Who is there that
can hymn the praises of the lord of the universe, that great Lord of all
who deserves our adorations and worship and reverence, whom the very gods
with Brahma at their head are unable to praise and whom the Rishis also
fail to sing? Aided, however, by my devotion to him, and having received
his permission, I have praised that Lord of sacrifices, that Deity of
supreme puissance, that foremost of all creatures endued with
intelligence. By praising with these names that enhance one's
auspiciousness of the great lord of blessedness, a worshipper of devoted
soul and pure heart succeeds in attaining to his own self. These names
constitute a hymn that furnishes the best means of attaining to Brahman.
With the aid of this hymn one is sure to succeed in attaining to
Emancipation. Rishis and the deities all praise the highest deity by
uttering this hymn. Hymned by persons of restrained soul Mahadeva becomes
gratified with those that hymn his praises so. The illustrious deity is
always full of compassion towards his devotees. Endued with omnipotence,
he it is that gives Emancipation to those that worship him. So also, they
among men that are foremost, that are possessed of faith and devotion
hear and recite for others and utter with reverence the praises of that
highest and eternal Lord viz. Isana, in all their successive lives and
adore him in thought, word, and deed, and adoring him thus at all times,
viz. when they are lying or seated or walking or awake or opening the
eyelids or shutting them, and thinking of him repeatedly, become objects
of reverence with all their fellowmen and derive great gratification and
exceeding joy. When a creature becomes cleansed of all his sins in course
of millions of births in diverse orders of being, it is then that
devotion springs up in his heart for Mahadeva. It is through good luck
alone that undivided devotion to Bhava who is the original cause (of the
universe) fully springs up in the heart of one that is conversant with
every mode of worshipping that great Deity.[185] Such stainless and pure
devotion to Rudra, that has singleness of purpose and that is simply
irresistible in its course, is seldom to be found among even the deities,
and never among men. It is through the grace of Rudra that such devotion
arises in the hearts of human beings. In consequence of such devotion,
men, identifying themselves wholly with Mahadeva, succeed in attaining to
the highest success. The illustrious Deity who is always inclined to
extend his grace towards them that seek him with humility, and throw
themselves with their whole soul upon him rescues them from the world.
Except the great Deity who frees creatures from rebirth, all other gods
constantly nullify the penances of men, for men have no other source of
puissance that is as great as these.[186] It was even thus Tandi of
tranquil soul, resembling Indra himself in splendour, praised the
illustrious Lord of all existent and non-existent things,--that great
Deity clad in animal skins. Indeed, Brahma had sung this hymn in the
presence of Sankara. Thou art a Brahmana (being conversant with Brahman
and devoted to those that are conversant with Brahman). Thou shalt,
therefore, comprehend it well. This is cleansing, and washes away all
sins. This confers Yoga and Emancipation and heaven and contentment. He
who recites this hymn with undivided devotion to Sankara succeeds in
attaining to that high end which is theirs that are devoted to the
doctrines of the Sankhya philosophy. That worshipper who recites this
hymn daily for one year with singleness of devotion succeeds in obtaining
the end that he desires. This hymn is a great mystery. It formerly
resided in the breast of Brahma the Creator. Brahma imparted it unto
Sakra. Sakra imparted unto Mrityu. Mrityu imparted it unto the Rudras.
From the Rudras Tandi got it. Indeed Tandi acquired it in the region of
Brahman as the reward of his severe austerities. Tandi communicated it to
Sukra, and Sukra of Bhrigu's race communicated it to Gautama. Gautama in
his turn, O descendant of Madhu, communicated it to Vaivaswata-Manu. Manu
communicated it unto Narayana of great intelligence, numbered among the
Sadhyas and held exceedingly dear by him. The illustrious Narayana,
numbered among the Sadhyas and possessed of glory that knows no
diminution, communicated it to Yama. Vaivaswat Yama communicated it to
Nachiketa. Nachiketa, O thou of Vrishni's race, communicated to
Markandeya. From Markandeya, O Janarddana, I obtained it as the reward of
my vows and fasts. To thee, O slayer of foes, I communicate that hymn
unheard by others. This hymn leads to heaven. It dispels disease and
bestows long life. This is worthy of the highest praise, and is
consistent with the Vedas.'

"Krishna continued, 'That person, O Partha, who recites this hymn with a
pure heart observing the vow of Brahmacharyya, and with his senses under
control, regularly for one whole year, succeeds in obtaining the fruits
of a horse-sacrifice. Danavas and Yakshas and Rakshasas and Pisachas and
Yatudhanas and Guhyakas and snakes can do no injury to him.'"



SECTION XVIII

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Vasudeva had ceased to speak, the great Yogin,
viz. the Island-born Krishna, addressed Yudhisthira, saying,--O son, do
thou recite this hymn consisting of the thousand and eight names of
Mahadeva, and let Maheswara be gratified with thee. In former days, O
son, I was engaged in the practice of severe austerities on the breast of
the mountains of Meru from desire of obtaining a son. It is this very
hymn that was recited by me. As the reward of this, I obtained the
fruition of all my wishes, O son of Pandu. Thou wilt also, by reciting
this same hymn, obtain from Sarva the fruition of all thy wishes.--After
this, Kapila, the Rishi who promulgated the doctrines that go by the name
of Sankhya, and who is honoured by the gods themselves, said,--I adore
Bhava with great devotion for many lives together. The illustrious Deity
at last became gratified with me and gave me knowledge that is capable of
aiding the acquirer in getting over rebirth.--After this, the Rishi named
Charusirsha, that dear friend of Sakra and known otherwise under the name
of Alamvana's son and who is filled with compassion, said,--I, in former
days, repaired to the mountains of Gokarna and sat myself to practise
severe penances for a hundred years. As the reward of those penances, I
obtained from Sarva, O son of king Pandu, a hundred sons, all of whom
were born without the intervention of woman, of well-restrained soul,
conversant with righteousness, possessed of great splendour, free from
disease and sorrow, and endued with lives extending over a hundred
thousand years--Then the illustrious Valmiki, addressing Yudhishthira,
said,--Once upon a time, in course of a dialectical disputation, certain
ascetics that were possessors of the homa fire denounced me as one guilty
of Brahmanicide. As soon as they had denounced me as such, the sin of
Brahmanicide, O Bharata, possessed me. I then, for cleansing myself,
sought the protection of the sinless Isana who is irresistible in energy.
I become cleansed of all my sins. That dispeller of all sorrows, viz.,
the destroyer of the triple city of the Asuras, said unto me,--Thy fame
shall be great in the world--Then Jamadagni's son, that foremost of all
righteous persons, shining like the Sun with blazing splendour in the
midst of that conclave of Rishis, said unto the son of Kunti these
words;--I was afflicted with the sin, O eldest son of Pandu, of
Brahmanicide for having slain my brothers who were all learned Brahmanas.
For purifying myself, I sought the protection, O king, of Mahadeva. I
hymned the praises of the great Deity by reciting his names. At this,
Bhava became gratified with me and gave me a battle-axe and many other
celestial weapons. And he said unto me,--Thou shalt be freed from sin and
thou shalt be invincible in battle; Death himself shall not succeed in
overcoming thee for thou shalt be freed from disease.--Even thus did the
illustrious and crested Deity of auspicious form said unto me. Through
the grace of that Deity of supreme intelligence I obtained all that He
had said. Then Viswamitra said,--I was formerly a Kshatriya. I paid my
adorations to Bhava with the desire of becoming a Brahmana Through the
grace of that great Deity I succeeded in obtaining the high status of a
Brahmana that is so difficult to obtain.--Then the Rishi Asita-Devala,
addressing the royal son of Pandu, said,--In former days, O son of Kunti,
through the curse of Sakra, all my merit due to the acts of righteousness
I had performed, was destroyed. The puissant Mahadeva it was who kindly
gave me back that merit together with great fame and a long life.--The
illustrious Rishi Gritsamada, the dear friend of Sakra, who resembled the
celestial preceptor Vrihaspati himself in splendour, addressing
Yudhishthira of Ajamidha's race said,--The inconceivable Sakra had, in
days of yore, performed a sacrifice extending over a thousand years.
While that sacrifice was going on, I was engaged by Sakra in reciting the
Samans. Varishtha, the son of that Manu who sprung from the eyes of
Brahma, came to that sacrifice and addressing me, said.--O foremost of
regenerate persons, the Rathantara is not being recited properly by thee.
O best of Brahmanas, cease to earn demerit by reading so faultily, and
with the aid of thy understanding do thou read the Samans correctly. O
thou of wicked understanding, why dost thou perpetrate such sin that is
destructive of sacrifice.--Having said these words, the Rishi Varishtha,
who was very wrathful, gave way to that passion and addressing me once
more, said,--Be thou an animal divested of intelligence, subject to
grief, ever filled with fear, and a denizen of trackless forests
destitute of both wind and water and abandoned by other animals. Do thou
thus pass ten thousand years with ten and eight hundred years in
addition. That forest in which thou shalt have to pass this period will
be destitute of all holy trees and will, besides, be the haunt of Rurus
and lions. Verily, thou shalt have to become a cruel deer plunged in
excess of grief.--As soon as he had said these words, O son of Pritha, I
immediately became transformed into a deer. I then sought the protection
of Maheswara. The great Deity said unto me,--Thou shalt be freed from
disease of every kind, and besides immortality shall be thine. Grief
shall never afflict thee. Thy friendship with Indra shall remain
unchanged, and let the sacrifices of both Indra and thyself Increase. The
illustrious and puissant Mahadeva favours all creatures in this way. He
is always the great dispenser and ordainer in the matter of the happiness
and sorrow of all living creatures. That illustrious Deity is incapable
of being comprehended in thought, word, or deed. O son, O thou that are
the best of warriors (through the grace of Mahadeva), there is none that
is equal to me in learning.--After this, Vasudeva, that foremost of all
intelligent men, once more said,--Mahadeva of golden eyes was gratified
by me with my penances. Gratified with me, O Yudhishthira, the
illustrious Deity said unto me,--Thou shalt, O Krishna, through my grace,
become dearer to all persons than wealth which is coveted by all. Thou
shalt be invincible in battle. Thy energy shall be equal to that of Fire.
Thousands of other boons Mahadeva gave unto me on that occasion. In a
former incarnation I adored Mahadeva on the Manimantha mountain for
millions of years. Gratified with me, the illustrious Deity said unto me
these words:--Blessed be thou, do thou solicit boons as thou wishest.
Bowing unto him with a bend of my head, I said these words,--If the
puissant Mahadeva has been gratified with me, then let my devotion to him
be unchanged, O Isana! Even this is the boon that I solicit.--The great
God said unto me,--Be it so--and disappeared there and then.'

"Jaigishavya said, 'O Yudhishthira, formerly in the city of Varanasi, the
puissant Mahadeva searching me out, conferred upon me the eight
attributes of sovereignty.'"

"Garga said,--'O son of Pandu, gratified with me in consequence of mental
sacrifice which I had performed, the great God bestowed upon me, on the
banks of the sacred stream Saraswati, that wonderful science, viz., the
knowledge of Time with its four and sixty branches. He also, bestowed
upon me, a thousand sons, all possessed of equal merit and fully
conversant with the Vedas. Through his grace, their periods of life as
also that of mine have become extended to ten millions of years.'"

"Parasara said,--'In former times I gratified Sarva, O king. I then
cherished the desire of obtaining a son that would be possessed of great
ascetic merit, endued with superior energy, and addressed to high Yoga,
that would earn world-wide fame, arrange the Vedas, and become the home
of prosperity, that would be devoted to the Vedas and the Brahmanas and
be distinguished for compassion. Even such a son was desired by me from
Maheswara. Knowing that this was the wish of my heart, that foremost of
Deities said unto me.--Through the fruition of that object of thine which
thou wishest to obtain from me, thou shalt have a son of the name of
Krishna. In that creation which shall be known after the name of
Savarni-Manu, that son of thine shall be reckoned among the seven Rishis.
He shall arrange the Vedas, and be the propagator of Kuru's race. He
shall, besides, be the author of the ancient histories and do good to the
universe. Endued with severe penances, he shall, again, be the dear
friend of Sakra. Freed from diseases of every kind, that son of thine, O
Parasara, shall besides, be immortal.--Having said these words, the great
Deity disappeared there and then. Even such is the good, O Yudhishthira,
that I have obtained from that indestructible and immutable God, endued
with the highest penances and supreme energy.'

"Mandavya said,--'In former times though not a thief and yet wrongly
suspected of theft, I was impaled (under the orders of a king). I then
adored the illustrious Mahadeva who said unto me,--Thou shalt soon be
freed from impalement and live for millions of years. The pangs due to
impalement shall not be thine. Thou shalt also be freed from every kind
of affliction and disease. And since, O ascetic, this body of thine hath
sprung from the fourth foot of Dharma (viz., Truth). Thou shalt be
unrivalled on Earth. Do thou make thy life fruitful. Thou shalt, without
any obstruction, be able to bathe in all the sacred waters of the Earth.
And after the dissolution of thy body, I shall, O learned Brahmana,
ordain that thou shall enjoy the pure felicity of heaven for unending
Time.--Having said these words unto me, the adorable Deity having the
bull for his vehicle, viz., Maheswara of unrivalled splendour and clad in
animal skin, O king, disappeared there and then with all his associates.'

"Galava said, Formerly I studied at the feet of my preceptor Viswamitra.
Obtaining his permission I set out for home with the object of seeing my
father. My mother (having become a widow), was filled with sorrow and
weeping bitterly, said unto me,--Alas, thy father will never see his son
who, adorned with Vedic knowledge, has been permitted by his preceptor to
come home and who, possessed of all the graces of youth, is endued with
self-restraint.--Hearing these words of my mother, I became filled with
despair in respect of again beholding my sire. I then paid my adoration
with a rapt soul to Maheswara who, gratified with me, showed himself to
me and said,--Thy sire, thy mother, and thyself, O son, shall all be
freed from death. Go quickly and enter thy abode; thou shall behold thy
sire there.--Having obtained the permission of the illustrious Deity, I
then repaired to my home, O Yudhishthira, and beheld my father, O son,
coming out after having finished his daily sacrifice. And he came out,
bearing in his hands a quantity of Homa-fuel and Kusa grass and some
fallen fruits. And he seemed to have already taken his daily food, for he
had washed himself properly. Throwing down those things from his hand, my
father, with eyes bathed in tears (of joy), raised me, for I had
prostrated myself at his feet. Embracing me he smelt my head, O son of
Pandu, and said.--By good luck, O son, art thou seen by me. Thou hast
come back, having acquired knowledge from the preceptor.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these marvellous and most wonderful
feats of the illustrious Mahadeva recited by the ascetics, the son of
Pandu became amazed. Then Krishna, that foremost of all intelligent
persons, spoke once more unto Yudhishthira, that ocean of righteousness,
like Vishnu speaking unto Puruhuta.'

"Vasudeva said, 'Upamanyu, who seemed to blaze with effulgence like the
Sun, said unto me,--Those sinful men that are stained with unrighteous
deeds, do not succeed in attaining to Isana. Their dispositions being
stained by the attributes of Rajas and Tamas, they can never approach the
Supreme Deity. It is only those regenerate persons who are of cleansed
souls that succeed in attaining to the Supreme Deity. Even if a person
lives in the enjoyment of every pleasure and luxury, yet if he be devoted
to the Supreme Deity, he comes to be regarded as the equal of forest
recluses of cleansed souls. If Rudra be gratified with a person, he can
confer upon him the states of ether Brahma or of Kesava or of Sakra with
all the deities under him, or the sovereignty of the three worlds. Those
men, O sire, who worship Bhava even mentally, succeed in freeing
themselves from all sins and attain to a residence in heaven with all the
gods. A person who raises houses to the ground and destroys tanks and
lakes indeed, who devastates the whole universe, does not become stained
with sin, if he adores and worships the illustrious Deity of three eyes.
A person that is destitute of every auspicious indication and that is
stained by every sin, has all his sins destroyed by meditating upon Siva.
Even worm and insects and birds, O Kesava, that devote themselves to
Mahadeva, are enabled to rove in perfect fearlessness. Even this is my
settled conviction that those men who devote themselves to Mahadeva
become certainly emancipated from rebirth. After this, Krishna again
addressed Yudhishthira the son of Dharma in the following words.

"Vishnu said, O Great King, 'Aditya, Chandra, Wind, Fire, Heaven, Earth,
the Vasus, the Viswedevas, Dhatri, Aryyaman, Sukra, Vrihaspati, the
Rudras, the Saddhyas, Varuna, Brahma, Sakra, Maruts, the Upanishads that
deal with knowledge of Brahman, Truth, the Vedas, the Sacrifices,
Sacrificial Presents, Brahmanas reciting the Vedas, Soma, Sacrificer, the
shares of the deities in sacrificial offerings or clarified butter poured
in sacrifices, Raksha, Diksha, all kinds of restraints in the form of
vows and fasts and rigid observances, Swaha, Vashat, the Brahmanas, the
celestial cow, the foremost acts of righteousness, the wheel of Time,
Strength, Fame, Self-restraint, the Steadiness of all persons endued with
intelligence, all acts of goodness and the reverse, the seven Rishis,
Understanding of the foremost order, all kinds of excellent touch, the
success of all (religious) acts, the diverse tribes of the deities, those
beings that drink heat, those that are drinkers of Soma, Clouds, Suyamas,
Rishitas, all creatures having Mantras for their bodies, Abhasuras, those
beings that live upon scents only, those that live upon vision only,
those that restrain their speech, those that restrain their minds, those
that are pure, those that are capable of assuming diverse forms through
Yoga-puissance, those deities that live on touch (as their food), those
deities that subsist on vision and those that subsist upon the butter
poured in sacrifices, those beings that are competent to create by fiats
of their will the objects they require, they that are regarded as the
foremost ones among the deities, and all the other deities, O descendant
of Ajamila, the Suparnas, the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Danavas,
Yakshas, the Charanas, the snakes, all that is gross and all that is
exceedingly subtile, all that is soft and all that is not subtile, all
sorrows and all joys, all sorrows that come after joy and all joy that
comes after sorrow, the Sankhya philosophy, Yoga, and that which
transcends objects which are regarded as foremost and very superior,--all
adorable things, all the deities, and all the protectors of the universe
who entering into the physical forces sustain and uphold this ancient
creation of that illustrious Deity,--have sprung from that Creator of all
creatures. All this that I have mentioned is grosser than that which the
wise think of with the aid of Penances. Indeed, that subtile Brahma is
the cause of life. I bow my head in reverence to it. Let that immutable
and indestructible Master, always adored by us, grant us desirable boons.
That person who, subjugating his senses and purifying himself, recites
this hymn, without interruption in respect of his vow, for one month,
succeeds in obtaining the merit that is attached to a Horse-sacrifice. By
reciting this hymn the Brahmana succeeds in acquiring all the Vedas; the
Kshatriya becomes crowned with victory, O son of Pritha; the Vaisya
becomes successful in obtaining wealth and cleverness; and the Sudra, in
winning happiness here and a good end hereafter. Persons of great fame,
by reciting this prince of hymns that is competent to cleanse every sin
and that is highly sacred and purifying, set their hearts on Rudra. A man
by reciting this prince of hymns succeeds in living in heaven for as many
years as there are pores in his body.'"



SECTION XIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'I ask, O chief of Bharata's race, what is the origin
of the saying, about discharging all duties jointly at the time of a
person's taking the hand of his spouse in marriage? Is that saying in
respect of discharging all duties together, due only to what is laid down
by the great Rishis in days of yore, or does it refer to the duty of
begetting offspring from religious motives, or has it reference to only
the carnal pleasure that is expected from such union? I he doubt that
fills my mind in this respect is very great. What is spoken of as joint
duties by the sages is in my consideration incorrect. That which is
called in this world the union for practising all duties together ceases
with death and is not to be seen to subsist hereafter. This union for
practising all duties together leads to heaven. But heaven, O grandsire,
is attained to by persons that are dead. Of a married couple it is seen
that only one dies at a time. Where does the other then remain? Do tell
me this. Men attain to diverse kinds of fruits by practising diverse
kinds of duties. The occupations again, to which men betake themselves
are of diverse kinds. Diverse, again, are the hells to which they go in
consequence of such diversity of duties and acts. Women, in particular,
the Rishis have said, are false in behaviour. When human beings are such,
and when women in particular have been declared in the ordinances to be
false, how, O sire, can there be a union between the sexes for purposes
of practising all duties together? In the very Vedas one may read that
women are false. The word 'Duty', as used in the Vedas, seems to have
been coined in the first instance for general application (so that it is
applied to practices that have no merit in them). Hence the application
of that word to the rites of marriage is, instead of being correct, only
a form of speech forcibly applied where application it has none.[187] The
subject seems to me to be inexplicable although I reflect upon it
incessantly. O grandsire, O thou of great wisdom, it behoveth thee to
expound this to me in detail, clearly and according to what has been laid
down in the Sruti. In fact, do thou explain to me what its
characteristics are, and the way in which it has come to pass!'[188]

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between Ashtavakra and the lady known by the name of Disa. In
days of yore Ashtavakra of severe penances, desirous of marriage, begged
the high-souled Rishi Vadanya of his daughter. The name by which the
damsel was known was Suprabha. In beauty she was unrivalled on Earth. In
virtues, dignity, conduct, and manners, she was superior to all the
girls. By a glance alone that girl of beautiful eyes had robbed him of
his heart even as a delightful grove in spring, adorned with flowers,
robs the spectator of his heart. The Rishi addressed Ashtavakra and
said,--Yes, I shall bestow my daughter on thee. Listen, however, to me.
Make a journey to the sacred North. Thou wilt see many things there!'[189]

"Ashtavakra said, 'It behoveth thee to tell me what I shall see in that
region. Indeed, I am ready to execute whatever command may be laid upon
me by thee.'"

"Vadanya said, 'Passing over the dominions of the lord of Treasures thou
will cross the Himavat mountains. Thou wilt then behold the plateau on
which Rudra resides. It is inhabited by Siddhas and Charanas. It abounds
with the associates of Mahadeva, frolicsome and fond of dance and
possessed of diverse forms. It is peopled with also many Pisachas, O
master, of diverse forms and all daubed with fragrant powders of diverse
hues, and dancing with joyous hearts in accompaniment with instruments of
different kinds made of brass. Surrounded by these who move with electric
rapidity in the mazes of the dance or refrain at times altogether from
forward or backward or transverse motion of every kind, Mahadeva dwells
there. That delightful spot on the mountains, we have heard, is the
favourite abode of the great Deity. It is said that that great god as
also his associates are always present there. It was there that the
goddess Uma practised the severest austerities for the sake of (obtaining
for her lord) the three-eyed Deity. Hence, it is said, that spot is much
liked by both Mahadeva and Uma. In days of yore there, on the heights of
the Mahaparswa, which are situate to the north of the mountains sacred to
Mahadeva, the sessions, and the last Night, and many deities, and many
human beings also (of the foremost order), in their embodied forms, had
adored Mahadeva.[190] Thou shalt cross that region also in thy northward
journey. Thou will then see a beautiful and charming forest blue of hue
and resembling a mass of clouds. There, in that forest, thou wilt behold
a beautiful female ascetic looking like Sree herself. Venerable in age
and highly blessed, she is in the observance of the Diksha. Beholding her
there thou shouldst duly worship her with reverence. Returning to this
place after having beheld her, thou wilt take the hand of my daughter in
marriage. If thou wanteth to make this agreement, proceed then on thy
journey and do what I command thee.'"

"Ashtavakra said, 'So be it. I shall do thy bidding. Verily, I shall
proceed to that region which thou speakest of, O thou of righteous soul.
On thy side, let thy words, accord with truth.'"

"Bhishma continued, "The illustrious Ashtavakra set out on his journey.
He proceeded more and more towards the north and at last reached the
Himavat mountains peopled by Siddhas and Charanas.[191] Arrived at the
Himavat mountains, that foremost of Brahamanas then came upon the sacred
river Vahuda whose waters produce great merit. He bathed in one of the
delightful Tirthas of that river, which was free from mud, and gratified
the deities with oblations of water. His ablutions being over, he spread
a quantity of Kusa grass and laid himself down upon it for resting awhile
at his ease.[192] Passing the night in this way, the Brahmana rose with
the day. He once more performed his ablutions in the sacred waters of the
Vahuda and then ignited his homa fire and worshipped it with the aid of
many foremost of Vedic mantras.[193] He then worshipped with due rites
both Rudra and his spouse Uma, and rested for some more time by the side
of that lake in the course of the Vahuda whose shores he had reached.
Refreshed by such rest, he set out from that region and then proceeded
towards Kailasa. He then beheld a gate of gold that seemed to blaze with
beauty. He saw also the Mandakini and the Nalini of the high-souled
Kuvera, the Lord of Treasures.[194] Beholding the Rishi arrived there,
all the Rakshasas having Manibhadra for their head, who were engaged in
protecting that lake abounding with beautiful lotuses, came out in a body
for welcoming and honouring the illustrious traveller. The Rishi
worshipped in return those Rakshasas of terrible prowess and asked them
to report, without delay, his arrival unto the Lord of Treasures.
Requested by him to do this, those Rakshasas, O king, said unto
him,--King Vaisravana, without waiting for the news from us, is coming of
his own accord to thy presence. The illustrious Lord of Treasures is well
acquainted with the object of this thy journey. Behold him,--that blessed
Master,--who blazes with his own energy. Then king Vaisravana,
approaching the faultless Ashtavakra, duly enquired about his welfare.
The usual enquiries of politeness being over, the Lord of Treasures then
addressed the regenerate Rishi, saying,--Welcome art thou here. Do tell
me what it is thou seekest at my hands. Inform me of it. I shall, O
regenerate one, accomplish whatever thou mayst bid me to accomplish. Do
thou enter my abode as pleases thee, O foremost of Brahamanas. Duly
entertained by me, and after thy business is accomplished, thou mayst go
without any obstacles being placed in thy way.--Having said these words,
Kuvera took the hand of that foremost of Brahmanas and led him into his
palace. He offered him his own seat as also water to wash his feet and
the Arghya made of the usual ingredients. After the two had taken their
seats, the Yakshas of Kuvera headed by Manibhadra, and many Gandharvas
and Kinnaras, also sat down before them. After all of them had taken
their seats, the Lord of Treasures said these words,--Understanding what
thy pleasure is, the diverse tribes of Apsaras will commence their dance.
It is meet that I should entertain thee with hospitality and that thou
shouldst be served with proper ministrations. Thus addressed, the ascetic
Ashtavakra said, in a sweet voice, Let the dance proceed. Then Urvara and
Misrakesi, and Rambha and Urvasi, and Alumvusha and Ghritachi, and Chitra
and Chitrangada and Ruchi, and Manohara and Sukesi and Sumukhi and Hasini
and Prabha, and Vidyuta, and Prasami and Danta and Vidyota and
Rati,--these and many other beautiful Apsaras began to dance. The
Gandharvas played on diverse kinds of musical instruments. After such
excellent music and dance had commenced, the Rishi Ashtavakra of severe
penances unconsciously passed a full celestial year there in the abode of
king Vaisravana.[195] Then king Vaisravana said unto the Rishi,--O
learned Brahmana, behold, a little more than a year has passed away since
thy arrival here. This music and dance, especially known by the name of
Gandharva, is a stealer of the heart (and of time). Do thou act as thou
wishes or let this go on if that be thy pleasure. Thou art my guest and,
therefore, worthy of adoration. This is my house. Givest thou thy
commands. We are all bound to thee. The illustrious Ashtavakra, thus
addressed by king Vaisravana, replied unto him, with a pleased heart,
saying,--I have been duly honoured by thee. I desire now, O Lord of
Treasures, to go hence. Indeed, I am highly pleased. All this befits
thee, O Lord of Treasures. Through thy grace, O illustrious one, and
agreeably to the command of the high-souled Rishi Vadanya, I shall now
proceed to my journey's end. Let growth and prosperity be thine.--Having
said these words, the illustrious Rishi set out of Kuvera's abode and
proceeded northwards. He crossed the Kailasa and the Mandara as also the
golden mountains. Beyond those high and great mountains is situated that
excellent region where Mahadeva, dressed as an humble ascetic, has taken
up his residence. He circumambulated the spot, with concentrated mind,
bending his head in reverence the while. Descending then on the Earth, he
considered himself sanctified for having obtained a sight of that holy
spot which is the abode of Mahadeva. Having circumambulated that mountain
thrice, the Rishi, with face turned towards the north, proceeded with a
joyous heart. He then beheld another forest that was very delightful in
aspect. It was adorned with the fruits and roots of every season, and it
resounded with the music of winged warblers numbering by thousands. There
were many delightful groves throughout the forest. The illustrious Rishi
then beheld a charming hermitage. The Rishi saw also many golden hills
decked with gems and possessed of diverse forms. In the begemmed soil he
saw many lakes and tanks also. And he saw diverse other objects that were
exceedingly delightful. Beholding these things, the mind of that Rishi of
cleansed soul became filled with joy. He then saw a beautiful mansion
made of gold and adorned with gems of many kinds. Of wonderful structure,
that mansion surpassed the place of Kuvera himself in every respect.
Around it there were many hills and mounts of jewels and gems. Many
beautiful cars and many heaps of diverse kinds of jewels also were
visible in that place. The Rishi beheld there the river Mandakini whose
waters were strewn with many Mandara flowers. Many gems also were seen
there that were self-luminous, and the soil all around was decked with
diamonds of diverse species. The palatial mansion which the Rishi saw
contained many chambers whose arches were embellished with various kinds
of stones. Those chambers were adorned also with nets of pearls
interspersed with jewels and gems of different species. Diverse kinds of
beautiful objects capable of stealing the heart and the eye, surrounded
that palace. That delightful retreat was inhabited by numerous Rishis.
Beholding these beautiful sights all around, the Rishi began to think
where he would take shelter. Proceeding then to the gate of the mansion,
he uttered these words:--Let those that live here know that a guest has
come (desirous of shelter). Hearing the voice of the Rishi, a number of
maidens came out together from that palace. They were seven in number, O
King, of different styles of beauty, all of them were exceedingly
charming. Every one of those maidens upon whom the Rishi cast his eyes,
stole his heart. The sage could not, with even his best efforts, control
his mind. Indeed, at the sight of those maidens of very superior beauty,
his heart lost all its tranquillity. Seeing himself yielding to such
influences, the Rishi made a vigorous effort and possessed as he was of
great wisdom he at last succeeded in controlling himself. Those damsels
then addressed the Rishi, saying,--Let the illustrious one enter. Filled
with curiosity in respect of those exceedingly beautiful damsels as also
of that palatial mansion, the regenerate Rishi entered as he was bidden.
Entering the mansion he beheld an old lady, with indications of
decrepitude, attired in white robes and adorned with every kind of
ornament. The Rishi blessed her, saying,--Good be to you.--The old lady
returned his good wishes in proper form. Rising up, she offered a seat to
the Rishi. Having taken his seat, Ashtavakra said,--Let all the damsels
go to their respective quarters. Only let one stay here. Let that one
remain here who is possessed of wisdom and who has tranquillity of heart.
Indeed, let all the others go away at their will.--Thus addressed, all
those damsels circumambulated the Rishi and then left the chamber. Only
that aged lady remained there. The day quickly passed and night came. The
Rishi seated on a splendid bed, addressed the old lady, saying,--O
blessed lady, the night is deepening. Do thou address thyself to sleep.
Their conversation being thus put a stop to by the Rishi, the old lady
laid herself down on an excellent bed of great splendour. Soon after, she
rose from her bed and pretending to tremble with cold, she left it for
going to the bed of the Rishi. The illustrious Ashtavakra welcomed her
with courtesy. The lady however, stretching her arms, tenderly embraced
the Rishi, O foremost of men. Beholding the Rishi quite unmoved and as
inanimate as a piece of wood, she became very sorry and began to converse
with him. There is no pleasure, save that which waits upon Kama (desire),
which women can derive from a person of the other sex. I am now under the
influence of desire. I seek thee for that reason. Do thou seek me in
return. Be cheerful, O learned Rishi, and unite thyself with me. Do thou
embrace me, O learned one, for I desire thee greatly. O thou of righteous
soul, even this union with me is the excellent and desirable reward of
those severe penances which thou hast undergone. At the first sight I
have become disposed to seek thee. Do thou also seek me. All this wealth,
and everything else of value that thou seest here are mine. Do thou
verily become the lord of all this along with my person and heart. I
shall gratify every wish of thine. Do thou sport with me, therefore, in
these delightful forest, O Brahmana, that are capable of granting every
wish. I shall yield thee complete obedience in everything, and thou shall
sport with me according to thy pleasure. All objects of desire that are
human or that appertain to heaven shall be enjoyed by us. There is no
pleasure more agreeable to women (than that which is derivable from the
companionship of a person of the other sex). Verily, congress with a
person of the opposite sex is the most delicious fruit of joy that we can
reap. When urged by the god of desire, women become very capricious. At
such times they do not feel any pain, even if they walk over a desert of
burning sand.'"

"Ashtavakra said, 'O blessed lady, I never approach one that is another's
spouse. One's congress with another man's wife is condemned by persons
conversant with the scriptures on morality. I am an utter stranger to
enjoyments of every kind. O blessed lady, know that I have become
desirous of wedlock for obtaining offspring. I swear by truth itself.
Through the aid of offspring righteously obtained, I shall proceed to
those regions of felicity which cannot be attained without such aid. O
good lady, know what is consistent with morality, and knowing it, desist
from thy efforts.'"

"The lady said, 'The very deities of wind and fire and water, or the
other celestials, O regenerate one, are not so agreeable to women as the
deity of desire. Verily, women are exceedingly fond of sexual congress.
Among a thousand women, or, perhaps, among hundreds of thousands,
sometimes only one may be found that is devoted to her husband. When
under the influence of desire, they care not for family or father or
mother or brother or husband or sons or husband's brother (but pursue the
way that desire points out). Verily, in pursuit of what they consider
happiness, they destroy the family (to which they belong by birth or
marriage) even as many queenly rivers eat away the banks that contain
them. The Creator himself had said this, quickly marking the faults of
women.'"[196]

"Bhishma continued, 'The Rishi, bent upon finding out the faults of
women, then addressed that lady, saying,--Cease to speak to me in this
strain. Yearning springs from liking. Tell me what (else) I am to
do.[197]--That lady then said in return,--O illustrious one, thou shalt
see according to time and place (as do whether I have anything agreeable
in me). Do thou only live here (for some time). O highly blessed one, and
I shall regard myself amply rewarded.--Thus addressed by her, the
regenerate Rishi, O Yudhishthira, expressed his resolution to comply with
her request, saying,--Verily, I shall dwell with thee in this place as
long as I can venture to do so.--The Rishi then, beholding that lady
afflicted with decrepitude, began to reflect earnestly on the matter. He
seemed to be even tortured by his thoughts. The eyes of that foremost of
Brahmanas failed to derive any delight from those parts of that lady's
person whereupon they were cast. On the other hand, his glances seemed to
be dispelled by the ugliness of those particular limbs.--This lady is
certainly the goddess of this palace. Has she been made ugly through some
curse. It is not proper that I should hastily ascertain the cause of
this.--Reflecting upon this in the secrecy of his heart, and curious to
know the reason, the Rishi passed the rest of that day in an anxious
state. The lady then addressed him, saying,--O illustrious one, behold
the aspect of the Sun reddened by the evening clouds. What service shall
I do unto thee.--The Rishi addressed her, saying,--.'Fetch water for my
ablutions. Having bathed, I shall say my evening prayers, restraining my
tongue and the senses.'"



SECTION XX

"Bhishma said, 'Thus commanded, the lady said,--Be it so. She then
brought oil (for rubbing the Rishi's body therewith) and a piece of cloth
for his wear during the ablutions. Permitted by the ascetic, she rubbed
every part of his body with the fragrant oil she had brought for him.
Gently was the Rishi rubbed, and when the process of rubbing was over, he
proceeded to the room set apart for the performance of ablutions. There
he sat upon a new and excellent seat of great splendour.[198] After the
Rishi had taken his seat upon it, the old lady began to wash his person
with her own soft hands whose touch was exceedingly agreeable. One after
another in due order, the lady rendered the most agreeable services to
the Rishi in the matter of his ablutions. Between the lukewarm water with
which he was washed, and the soft hands that were employed in washing
him, the Rishi of rigid vows failed to understand that the whole night
had passed away in the process. Rising from the bath the Rishi became
highly surprised. He saw the Sun risen above the horizon on the East. He
was amazed at this and asked himself,--Was it really so or was it an
error of the understanding?--The Rishi then duly worshipped the god of a
thousand rays. This done, he asked the lady as to what he should do. The
old lady prepared some food for the Rishi that was as delicious to the
taste as Amrita itself. In consequence of the delicious character of that
food the Rishi could not take much. In taking that little, however, the
day passed away and evening came. The old lady then asked the Rishi to go
to bed and sleep. An excellent bed was assigned to the Rishi and another
was occupied by herself. The Rishi and the old lady occupied different
beds at first but when it was midnight, the lady left her own bed for
coming to that of the Rishi.'

"Ashtavakra said, 'O blessed lady, my mind turns away from sexual
congress with one who is the spouse of another. Leave my bed, O good
lady. Blessed be thou, do thou desist from this of thy own accord.'[199]

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus dissuaded by that Brahmana with the aid of his
self-restraint, the lady answered him, saying,--I am my own mistress. In
accepting me thou wilt incur no sin.'

"Ashtavakra said, 'Women can never be their own mistresses. This is the
opinion of the Creator himself, viz., that a woman never deserves to be
independent.'

"The lady said, 'O learned Brahmana, I am tortured by desire. Mark my
devotion to thee. Thou incurrest sin by refusing to accost me lovingly.'

"Ashtavakra said, 'Diverse faults, drag away the man that acts as he
likes. As regards myself, I am able to control my inclinations by
self-restraint. O good lady, do thou return to thy own bed.'

"The lady said, 'I bow to thee, bending my head. It behoves thee to show
me thy grace. O sinless one, I prostrate myself before thee, do thou
become my refuge. If indeed, thou seest such sin in congress with one
that is not thy spouse, I yield myself unto thee. Do thou, O regenerate
one, accept my hand in marriage. Thou wilt incur no sin. I tell thee
truly. Know that I am my own mistress. If there by any sin in this, let
it be mine alone. My heart is devoted to thee. I am my own mistress. Do
thou accept me.'

"Ashtavakra said, 'How is it, O good lady, that thou art thy own
mistress. Tell me the reason of this. There is not a single woman in the
three worlds that deserves to be regarded as the mistress of her own
self. The father protects her while she is a maiden. The husband protects
her while she is in youth. Sons protect her when she is aged. Women can
never be independent as long as they live!'

"The lady said, 'I have since my maidenhood, adopted the vow of
Brahmacharyya. Do not doubt it. I am still a maid. Do thou make me thy
wife. O Brahmana, do not kill this devotion of mine to thee.'

"Ashtavakra said, 'As thou art inclined to me, so I am inclined to thee.
There is this question, however, that should be settled. Is it true that
by yielding to my inclinations I shall not be regarded as acting in
opposition to what the Rishi (Vadanya) wishes. This is very wonderful.
Will this lead to what is beneficial? Here is a maiden adorned with
excellent ornaments and robes. She is exceedingly beautiful. Why did
decrepitude cover her beauty so long? At present she looks like a
beautiful maiden. There is no knowing what form she may take
hereafter.[200] I shall never swerve from that restraint which I have
over desire and the other passions or from contentment with what I have
already got. Such swerving does not seem to be good. I shall keep myself
united with truth!'[201]



SECTION XXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me why had that lady no fear of Ashtavakra's
curse although Ashtavakra was endued with great energy? How also did
Ashtavakra succeed in coming back from that place?'"

"Bhishma said, 'Ashtavakra asked her, saying,--How dost thou succeed in
altering thy form so? Thou shouldst not say anything that is untrue. I
wish to know this. Speakest thou truly before a Brahmana.'

"The lady said, 'O best of Brahmana, wherever thou mayst reside in heaven
or on Earth, this desire of union between the sexes is to be observed. O
thou of infallible prowess, listen, with concentrated attention, to this
all. This trial was devised by me. O sinless one, for testing thee
aright. O thou of infallible prowess, thou hast subjugated all the worlds
for not foregoing your previous resolution. Know that I am the embodiment
of the Northern point of the compass. Thou hast seen the lightness of the
female character. Even women that are aged are tortured by the desire of
sexual union. The Grandsire himself and all the deities with Indra have
been pleased with thee. The object for which thy illustrious self has
come here (is known to me). O foremost of regenerate persons, thou hast
been despatched higher by the Rishi Vadanya--the father of thy bride--in
order that I may instruct thee. Agreeably to the wishes of that Rishi I
have already instructed thee. Thou wilt return home in safety. Thy
journey back will not be toilsome. Thou wilt obtain for wife and girl
thou hast chosen. She will bear thee a son. Through desire I had
solicited thee, thou madest me the very best answer. The desire for
sexual union is incapable of being transcended in the three worlds. Go
back to thy quarters, having achieved such merit. What else is there that
thou wishest to hear from me? I shall discourse on it, O Ashtavakra, in
accordance with the truth. I was gratified by the Rishi Vadanya in the
first instance for thy sake, O regenerate ascetic For the sake of
honouring him, I have said all this to thee.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of hers, the regenerate
Ashtavakra joined his hands in a reverential attitude. He then solicited
the lady for her permission to go back. Obtaining the permission he came
back to his own asylum. Resting himself for some time at home and
obtaining the permission of his kinsmen and friends, he then in a proper
way, proceeded, O delighter of the Kurus, to the Brahmana Vadanya.
Welcomed with the usual enquiries by Vadanya, the Rishi Ashtavakra, with
a well-pleased heart, narrated all that he had seen (in course of his
sojourn to the North). He said,--Commanded by thee I proceeded to the
mountains of Gandhamadana. In the regions lying to the north of these
mountains I beheld a very superior goddess. I was received by her with
courtesy. She named you in my hearing and also instructed me in various
matters. Having listened to her I have come back, O lord. Unto him that
said so, the learned Vadanya said,--Take my daughter's hand according to
due rites and under the proper constellations. Thou art the fittest
bridegroom I can select for the girl.'

'Bhishma continued, 'Ashtavakra said,--So be it and took the hand of the
girl. Indeed, the highly righteous Rishi, having espoused the girl,
became filled with joy. Having taken as his wife that beautiful damsel,
the Rishi continued to dwell in his own asylum, freed from (mental) fever
of every kind.'"



SECTION XXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Whom do the eternal Brahmanas strictly observing
religious rites call a proper object of gifts? Is a Brahmana that bears
the symbols of the order of life he follows to be regarded as such or one
who does not bear such indications is to be so regarded?'[202]

"Bhishma said, 'O monarch, it has been said that gifts should be made
unto a Brahmana that adheres to the duties of his own order, whether, he
bears the indications of a Brahmachari or not, for both are faultless,
viz., he that bears such indications and he that is divested of them.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What fault does an uncleansed person incur, if he
makes gifts of sacrificial butter or food with great devotion unto
persons of the regenerate order?'

"Bhishma said, 'Even one that is most destitute of self-restraint
becomes, without doubt, cleansed by devotion. Such a man, O thou of great
splendour, becomes cleansed in respect of every act (and not with
reference to gift alone).'

"Yudhishthira said, 'It has been said that a Brahmana that is sought to
be employed in an act having reference to the deities, should never be
examined. The learned, however, say that with respect to such acts as
have reference to the Pitris, the Brahmana that is sought to be employed,
should be examined (in the matter of both his conduct and competence).'

"Bhishma said, 'As regards acts that have reference to the deities, these
fructify not in consequence of the Brahmana that is employed in doing the
rites but through the grace of the deities themselves. Without doubt,
those persons that perform sacrifice obtain the merit attached to those
acts, through the grace of the deities.[203] The Brahmanas, O chief of
the Bharatas, are always devoted of Brahman. The Rishi Markandeya, one of
the greatest Rishis endued with intelligence in all the worlds, said this
in days of yore.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Why, O grandsire, are there five viz., he that is a
stranger, he that is endued with learning (connected with the duties of
his order), he that is connected by marriage, he that is endued with
penances, and he that adheres to the performance of sacrifices, regarded
as proper persons?'[204]

"Bhishma said, 'The first three, viz., strangers, relatives, and
ascetics, when possessed of these attributes, viz., purity of birth,
devotion to religious acts, learning, compassion, modesty, sincerity, and
truthfulness, are regarded as proper persons. The other two, viz., men of
learning and those devoted to sacrifices, when endued with five of these
attributes, viz., purity of birth, compassion, modesty, sincerity,
truthfulness, are also regarded as proper persons. Listen now to me, O
son of Pritha, as I recite to thee the opinions of these four persons of
mighty energy, viz., the goddess Earth, the Rishi Kasyapa, Agni (the
deity of fire) and the ascetic Markandeya.'

"The Earth said, 'As a clod of mud, when thrown into the great ocean
quickly dissolves away, even so every kind of sin disappears in the three
high attributes viz., officiation at sacrifices, teaching and receiving
of gifts.[205]

"Kasyapa said, 'The Vedas with their six branches, the Sankhya
philosophy, the Puranas, and high birth, these fail to rescue a
regenerate person if he falls away from good conduct.'[206]

"Agni said, 'That Brahmana who, engaged in study and regarding himself
learned, seeks with the aid of his learning to destroy the reputation of
others, falls away from righteousness, and comes to be regarded as
dissociated from truth. Verily regions of felicity herein-after are never
attained to by such a person of destructive genius.'

"Markandeya said, 'If a thousand Horse-sacrifices and Truth were weighed
in the balance, I do not know whether the former would weigh even half as
heavy as the latter.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Having spoken these words, those four persons, each
of whom is endued with immeasurable energy, viz., the goddess Earth,
Kasyapa, Agni, and Bhrigu's son armed with weapons, quickly went away.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'If Brahmanas observant of the vow of Brahmacharyya
in this world solicit the offerings one makes (unto one's deceased
ancestors in Sraddhas) I ask, can the Sraddha be regarded well-performed,
if the performer actually makes over those offerings unto such Brahmanas.

"Bhishma said, 'If, having practised the vow of Brahmacharyya for the
prescribed period (of twelve years) and acquired proficiency in the Vedas
and their branches, a Brahmana himself solicits the offering made in
Sraddhas and eats the same, he is regarded to fall away from his vow. The
Sraddha, however, is not regarded as stained in any way.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'The wise have said that duty of righteousness has
many ends and numerous doors. Tell me, O grandsire, what however are the
settled conclusions in this matter.'[207]

Bhishma said, 'Abstention from injury to others, truthfulness, the
absence of wrath (forgiveness), compassion, self-restraint, and sincerity
or candour, O monarch, are the indications of Righteousness. There are
persons who wander over the earth, praising righteousness but without
practising what they preach and engaged all the while in sin. O king, He
who gives unto such persons gold or gems or steeds, has to sink in hell
and to subsist there for ten years, eating the while the faeces of such
persons as live upon the flesh of dead kine and buffalos, of men called
Pukkasas, of others that live in the outskirts of cities and villages,
and of men that publish, under the influence of wrath and folly, the acts
and the ommissions of others.[208] Those foolish men who do give unto a
Brahmana observant of the vow of Brahmacharyya the offerings made in
Sraddhas (unto one's deceased ancestors), have to go, O monarch into
regions of great misery.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, what is superior to
Brahmacharyya? What is the highest indication of virtue? What is the
highest kind of purity?'

"Bhishma said,--'I tell thee, O son, that abstention from honey and meat
is even superior to Brahmacharyya. Righteousness consists in keeping
within boundaries or in self-restraint, the best indication of
Righteousness is Renunciation (which is also the highest kind of
purity).[209]

"Yudhishthira said, 'In what time should one practise Righteousness? In
what time should wealth be sought? In what time should pleasure be
enjoyed? O grandsire, do tell me this.'

"Bhishma said,--'One should earn wealth in the first part of one's life.
Then should one earn Righteousness, and then enjoy pleasure. One should
not, however, attach oneself to any of these. One should regard the
Brahmanas, worship one's preceptor and seniors, show compassion for all
creatures, be of mild disposition and agreeable speech. To utter
false-hood in a court of justice, to behave deceitfully towards the king,
to act falsely towards preceptors and seniors, are regarded as equivalent
(in heinousness) to Brahmanicide. One should never do an act of violence
to the king's person. Nor should one ever strike a cow. Both these
offences are equivalent to the sin of foeticide. One should never abandon
one's (homa) fire. One should also never cast off one's study of the
Vedas. One should never assail a Brahmana by words or acts. All these
offences are equivalent to Brahmanicide.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'What kind of Brahmanas should be regarded as good?
By making presents unto (what kind of) Brahmanas one may acquire great
merit? What kind of Brahmanas are they whom one should feed? Tell me all
this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'Those Brahmanas that are freed from wrath, that are
devoted to acts of righteousness, that are firm in Truth, and that
practise self-restraint are regarded as good. By making gifts unto them
one acquires great merit. One wins great merit by making presents unto
such Brahmanas as are free from pride, capable of bearing everything,
firm in the pursuit of their objects, endued with mastery over their
senses, devoted to the good of all creatures, and disposed to be friendly
towards all. One earns great merit by making gifts unto such Brahmanas as
are free from cupidity, as are pure of heart and conduct, possessed of
learning and modesty, truthful in speech and observant of their own
duties as laid down in the scriptures. The Rishis have declared that
Brahmana to be a deserving object of gifts who studies the four Vedas
with all their branches and is devoted to the six well-known duties (laid
down in the scriptures). One acquires great merit by making gifts unto
Brahmanas possessed of such qualifications. The man who makes gifts unto
a deserving Brahmana multiplies his merit a thousand-fold. A single
righteous Brahmana possessed of wisdom and Vedic lore, observant of the
duties laid down in the scriptures, distinguished by purity of behaviour,
is competent to rescue a whole race.[210] One should make gifts of kine
and horses and wealth and food and other kinds of articles unto a
Brahmana that is possessed of such qualifications. By making such gifts
unto such persons one earns great happiness in the next world. As I have
already told thee even one such Brahmana is fully competent to rescue the
entire race to which the giver belongs. What need I say, therefore, O
dear son, of the merit of making gifts unto many Brahmanas of such
qualifications? In making gifts, therefore one should always select the
object to whom the gifts are to be made. Hearing of a Brahmana possessed
of proper qualifications and regarded with respect by all good people,
one should invite him even if he resides at a distance and welcome him
when he arrives and one should worship him by all means in his power.'"



SECTION XXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I desire thee, O grandsire, to tell me what the
ordinances are that have been laid down by the acts touching the deities
and the (deceased) ancestors on occasions of Sraddhas.'

"Bhishma said, 'Having purified oneself (by baths and other purificatory
acts) and then going through the well-known auspicious rites, one should
carefully do all act relating to the deities in the forenoon, and all
acts relating to the Pitris in the afternoon. What is given to men should
be given in the midday with affection and regard. That gift which is made
untimely is appropriated by Rakshasas.[211] Gifts of articles that have
been leapt over by any one, o been licked or sucked, that are not given
peacefully, that have been seen by women that are impure in consequence
of their season having come, do not produce any merit. Such gifts are
regarded as the portion belonging to the Rakshasas. Gifts of articles
that have been proclaimed before many people or from which a portion has
been eaten by a Sudra, or that have been seen or licked by a dog, form
portions of Rakshasas. Food which is mixed with hair or in which there
are worms, or which has been stained with spittle or saliva or which has
been gazed at by a dog or into which tear-drops have fallen or which has
been trodden upon should be known as forming the portion of Rakshasa.
Food that has been eaten by a person incompetent to utter the syllable
Om, or that has been eaten by a person bearing arms, O Bharata, or that
has been eaten by a wicked person should be known to form the portion of
Rakshasas.[212] The food that is eaten by a person from which a portion
has already been eaten by another, or which is eaten without a part
thereof having been offered to deities and guests and children, is
appropriated by Rakshasas. Such stained food, if offered to the deities
and Pitris is never accepted by them but is appropriated by Rakshasas.
The food offered by the three regenerate classes in Sraddhas, in which
Mantras are either not uttered or uttered incorrectly and in which the
ordinances laid down in the scriptures are not complied with, if
distributed to guests and other people, is appropriated by Rakshasas. The
food that is distributed to guests without having been previously
dedicated to the deities or the Pitris with the aid of libation on the
sacred fire, which has been stained in consequence of a portion thereof
having been eaten by a person that is wicked or of irreligious behaviour,
should be known to form the portion of Rakshasas.'

"'I have told thee what the portions are of the Rakshasas. Listen now to
me as I lay down the rules for ascertaining who the Brahmana is that is
deserving of gift.[213] All Brahmanas that have been outcasted (on
account of the commission of heinous sins), as also Brahmanas that are
idiots and out of mind, do not deserve to be invited to Sraddhas in which
offerings are made to either the deities or the Pitris. That Brahmana who
is afflicted with leucoderma, or he that is destitute of virility, or he
that has got leprosy, or he that has got phthisis or he that is labouring
under epilepsy (with delusions of the sensorium), or he that is blind,
should not, O king, be invited.[214] Those Brahmanas that practise the
calling of physicians, those that receive regular pay for worshipping the
images of deities established by the rich, or live upon the service of
the deities, those that are observant of vows from pride or other false
motives, and those that sell Soma, do not deserve to be invited. Those
Brahmanas that are, by profession, vocalists, or dancers or players or
instrumental musicians, or reciters of sacred books, or warriors and
athletes, do not, O king, deserve to be invited. Those Brahmanas who pour
libations on the sacred fire for Sudras, or who are preceptors of Sudras,
or who as servants of Sudra masters, do not deserve to be invited. That
Brahmana who is paid for his services as preceptor, or who attends as
pupil upon the lectures of some preceptor because of some allowance that
is granted to him, does not deserve to be invited, for both of them are
regarded as sellers of Vedic lore. That Brahmana who has been once
induced to accept the gift of food in a Sraddha at the very outset, as
also he who has married a Sudra wife, even if possessed of every kind of
knowledge do not deserve to be invited.[215] Those Brahmanas that are
destitute of their domestic fire, and they that attend upon corpses, they
that are thieves, and they that have otherwise fallen away do not, O
king, deserve to be invited.[216] Those Brahmanas whose antecedents are
not known or are vile, and they that are Putrika-putras, do not, O king,
deserve to be invited on occasions of Sraddhas.[217] That Brahmana who
gives loans of money, or he who subsists upon the interest of the loans
given by him, or he who lives by sale of living creatures, does not
deserve, O king, to be invited. Persons who have been subjugated by their
wives, or they who live by becoming the paramours of unchaste women, or
they who abstain from their morning and evening prayers do not deserve, O
king, to be invited to Sraddhas.'

"'Listen now to me as I mention who the Brahmana is that has been
ordained for acts done in honour of the deities and the Pitris. Indeed, I
shall tell thee what those merits, are in consequence of which one may
become a giver or a recipient of gifts in Sraddhas (notwithstanding the
faults mentioned above).[218] Those Brahmanas that are observant of the
rites and ceremonies laid down in the scriptures, or they that are
possessed of merit, or they that are conversant with the Gayatri, or they
that are observant of the ordinary duties of Brahmanas, even if they
happen to betake themselves to agriculture for a living, are capable, O
king, of being invited to Sraddhas. If a Brahmana happens to be wellborn,
he deserves to be invited to Sraddhas notwithstanding his profession of
arms for fighting the battle of others.[219] That Brahmana, however, O
son, who happens to betake himself to trade for a living should be
discarded (even if possessed of merit). The Brahmana who pours libations
every day on the sacred fire, or who resides in a fixed habitation, who
is not a thief and who does the duties of hospitality to guests arrived
at his house, deserves, O king, to be invited to Sraddhas. The Brahmana,
O chief of Bharata's race, who recites the Savitri morning, noon, and
night, or who subsists upon eleemosynary charity, who is observant of the
rites and ceremonies laid down in the scriptures for persons of his
order, deserves, O king, to be invited to Sraddhas.[220] That Brahmana
who having earned wealth in the morning becomes poor in the afternoon, or
who poor in the morning becomes wealthy in the evening or who is
destitute of malice, or is stained by a minor fault, deserves, O king, to
be invited to Sraddhas. That Brahmana who is destitute of pride or sin,
who is not given to dry disputation, or who subsists upon alms obtained
in his rounds of mendicancy from house to house deserves, O king, to be
invited to sacrifices. One who is not observant of vows, or who is
addicted to falsehood (in both speech and conduct), who is a thief, or
who subsists by the sale of living creatures or by trade in general,
becomes worthy of invitation to Sraddhas, O king, if he happens to offer
all to the deities first and subsequently drink Soma. That man who having
acquired wealth by foul or cruel means subsequently spends it in adoring
the deities and discharging the duties of hospitality, becomes worthy, O
king, of being invited to Sraddhas. The wealth that one has acquired by
the sale of Vedic lore, or which has been earned by a women, or which has
been gained by meanness (such as giving false evidence in a court of
law), should never be given to Brahmanas or spent in making offerings to
the Pitris. That Brahmana, O chief of Bharata's race, who upon the
completion of a Sraddha that is performed with his aid, refuses to utter
the words 'astu swadha,' incurs the sin of swearing falsely in a suit for
land.[221] The time for performing Sraddha, O Yudhishthira, is that when
one obtains a good Brahmana and curds and ghee and the sacred day of the
new moon, and the meat of wild animals such as deer and others.[222] Upon
the completion of a Sraddha performed by a Brahmana the word Swadha
should be uttered. If performed by a Kshatriya the words that should be
uttered are--Let thy Pitris be gratified.--Upon the completion of a
Sraddha performed by a Vaisya, O Bharata, the words that should be
uttered are--Let everything become inexhaustible.--Similarly, upon the
conclusion of a Sraddha performed by a Sudra, the word that should be
uttered is Swasti,--In respect of a Brahmana, the declaration regarding
Punyaham should be accompanied with the utterance of the syllable Om. In
the case of a Kshatriya, such declaration should be without the utterance
of syllable Om. In the rites performed by a Vaisya, the words that should
be uttered, instead of beings the syllable Om, are,--Let the deities be
gratified.[223]--Listen now to me as I tell thee the rites that should be
performed, one after another, conformably to the ordinances, (in respect
of all the orders). All the rites that go by the name of Jatakarma, O
Bharata, are indispensable in the case of all the three orders (that are
regenerate). All these rites, O Yudhishthira, in the case of both
Brahmanas and Kshatriyas as also in that of Vaisyas are to be performed
with the aid of mantras. The girdle of a Brahmana should be made of Munja
grass. That for one belonging to the royal order should be a bowstring.
The Vaisya's girdle should be made of the Valwaji grass. Even this is
what has been laid down in the scriptures. Listen now to me as I expound
to thee what constitutes the merits and faults of both givers and
recipients of gifts. A Brahmana becomes guilty of a dereliction of duty
by uttering a falsehood. Such an act on his part is sinful. A Kshatriya
incurs four times and a Vaisya eight times the sin that a Brahmana incurs
by uttering a falsehood. A Brahmana should not eat elsewhere, having been
previously invited by a Brahmana. By eating at the house of the person
whose invitation has been posterior in point of time, he becomes inferior
and even incurs the sin that attaches to the slaughter of an animal on
occasions other than those of sacrifices.[224] So also, if he eats
elsewhere after having been invited by a person of the royal order or a
Vaisya, he falls away from his position and incurs half the sin that
attaches to the slaughter of an animal on occasions other than those of
sacrifices. That Brahmana, O king, who eats on occasions of such rites as
are performed in honour of the deities or the Pitris by Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas, without having performed his ablutions, incurs
the sin of uttering an untruth for a cow. That Brahmana, O king, who eats
on occasions of similar rites performed by persons belonging to the three
higher orders, at a time when he is impure in consequence either of a
birth or a death among his cognates, through temptation, knowing well
that he is impure incurs the same sin.[225] He who lives upon wealth
obtained under false pretences like that of sojourns to sacred places or
who solicits the giver for wealth pretending that he would spend it in
religious acts, incurs, O monarch, the sin of uttering a falsehood.[226]
That person, belonging to any of the three higher orders, O Yudhishthira,
who at Sraddhas and on other occasions distributes food with the aid of
Mantras, unto such Brahmanas as do not study the Vedas and as are not
observant of vows, or as have not purified their conduct, certainly
incurs sin.'

"Yudhishthira said,--'I desire, O grandsire, to know by giving unto whom
the things dedicated to the deities and the Pitris, one may earn the
amplest rewards.'

"Bhishma said,--'Do thou, Yudhishthira, feed those Brahmanas whose
spouses reverently wait for the remnants of the dishes of their husbands
like tillers of the soil waiting in reverence for timely showers of rain.
One earn great merit by making gifts unto those Brahmanas that are always
observant of pure conduct, O king, that are emaciated through abstention
from all luxuries and even full meals, that are devoted to the
observances of such vows as lead to the emaciation of the body, and that
approach givers with the desire of obtaining gifts. By making gifts unto
such Brahmanas as regard conduct in this light of food, as regard conduct
in the light of spouses and children, as regard conduct in the light of
strength, as regard conduct in the light of their refuge for crossing
this world and attaining to felicity in the next, and as solicit wealth
only when wealth is absolutely needed, one earns great merit. By making
gifts unto those persons, O Yudhishthira, that having lost everything
through thieves or oppressors, approach the giver, one acquires great
merit.[227] By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as solicit food from the
hands of even a poor person of their order who has just got something
from others, one earns great merit. By making gifts unto such Brahmanas
as have lost their all in times of universal distress and as have been
deprived of their spouses on such occasions, and as come to givers with
solicitations for alms, one acquires great merit. By making gifts unto
such Brahmanas as are observant of vows, and as place themselves
voluntarily under painful rules and regulations, as are respectful in
their conduct to the declaration laid down in the Vedas, and as come to
solicit wealth for spending it upon the rites necessary to complete their
vows and other observances, one earns great merit. By making gifts unto
such Brahmanas as live at a great distance from the practices that are
observed by the sinful and the wicked, as are destitute of strength for
want of adequate support, and as are very poor in earthly possessions,
one earns great merit. By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as have been
robbed of all their possessions by powerful men but as are perfectly
innocent, and as desire to fill their stomachs any how without, that is,
any scruples respecting the quality of the food they take, one earns
great merit. By making gifts unto such Brahmanas as beg on behalf of
others that are observant of penances and devoted to them and as are
satisfied with even small gifts, one earns great merit. Thou hast now, O
bull of Bharata's race, heard what the declarations are of the scriptures
in respect of the acquisition of great merit by the making of gifts.
Listen now to me as I expound what those acts are that lead to hell or
heaven. They, O Yudhishthira, that speak an untruth on occasions other
than those when such untruth is needed for serving the purpose of the
preceptor or for giving the assurance of safety to a person in fear of
his life, sink into hell[228]. They who ravish other people's spouses, or
have sexual congress with them, or assist at such acts of delinquency,
sink in hell. They who rob others of their wealth or destroy the wealth
and possessions of other people, or proclaim the faults of other people,
sink in hell. They who destroy the containers of such pieces of water as
are used by cattle for quenching thirst, as injure such buildings as are
used for purposes of public meetings, as break down bridges and
causeways, and as pull down houses used for purposes of habitation, have
to sink to hell. They who beguile and cheat helpless women, or girls, or
aged dames, or such women as have been frightened, have to sink to hell.
They who destroy the means of other people's living, they who exterminate
the habitations of other people, they who rob others of their spouses,
they who sow dissensions among friends, and they who destroy the hopes of
other people, sink into hell. They who proclaim the faults of others,
they who break down bridges or causeways, they who live by following
vocations laid down for other people, and they who are ungrateful to
friends for services received, have to sink in hell. They who have no
faith in the Vedas and show no reverence for them, they who break the
vows made by themselves or oblige others to break them, and they who fall
away from their status through sin, sink in hell. They who betake
themselves to improper conduct, they who take exorbitant rates of
interest, and they who make unduly large profits on sales, have to sink
in hell. They who are given to gambling, they who indulge in wicked acts
without any scruple, and they who are given to slaughter of living
creatures, have to sink in hell. They who cause the dismissal by masters
of servants that are hoping for rewards or are expectant of definite need
or are in the enjoyment of wages or salaries or are waiting for returns
in respect of valuable services already rendered, have to sink in hell.
They who themselves eat without offering portions thereof unto their
spouse or their sacred fires or their servants or their guests, and they
who abstain from performing the rites laid down in the scriptures for
honouring the Pitris and deities, have to sink in hell. They who sell the
Vedas, they who find fault with the Vedas, and they who reduce the Vedas
into writing, have all to sink in hell.[229] They who are out of the pale
of the four well-known modes of life, they who betake themselves to
practices interdicted by the Srutis and the scriptures, and they who live
by betaking themselves to acts that are wicked or sinful or that do not
belong to their order of birth, have to sink in hell. They who live by
selling hair, they who subsist by selling poisons, and they who live by
selling milk, have to sink in hell. They who put obstacles in the path of
Brahmanas and kine and maidens, O Yudhishthira, have to sink in hell.
They who sell weapons, they who forge weapons, they who make shafts, and
they who make bows, have to sink in hell. 'I hey who obstruct paths and
roads with stones and thorns and holes have to sink in hell. They who
abandon and cast off preceptors and servants and loyal followers without
any offence, O chief of Bharata's race, have to sink in hell. They who
set bullocks to work before the animals attain to sufficient age, they
who bore the noses of bullocks and other animals for controlling them the
better while employed in work, and they who keep animals always tethered,
have to sink in hell. Those kings that do not protect their subjects
while forcibly taking from them a sixth share of the produce of their
fields, and they who, though able and possessed of resources, abstain
from making gifts, have to sink in hell. They who abandon and cast off
persons that are endued with forgiveness and self-restraint and wisdom,
or those with whom they have associated for many years, when these are no
longer of services to them, have to sink in hell. Those men who
themselves eat without giving portions of the food to children and aged
men and servants, have to sink in hell.'

"'All these men enumerated above have to go to hell. Listen now to me, O
bull of Bharata's race, as I tell thee who those men are that ascend to
heaven. The man who transgresses against a Brahmana by impeding the
performances of all such acts in which the deities are adored, becomes
afflicted with the loss of all his children and animals. (They who do not
transgress against Brahmanas by obstructing their religious acts ascend
to heaven). Those men, O Yudhishthira, who follow the duties as laid down
in the scriptures for them and practise the virtues of charity and
self-restraint and truthfulness, ascend to heaven. Those men who having
acquired knowledge by rendering obedient services to their preceptors and
observing austere penances, become reluctant to accept gifts, succeed in
ascending to heaven. Those men through whom other people are relieved and
rescued from fear and sin and the impediments that lie in the way of what
they wish to accomplish and poverty and the afflictions of disease,
succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who are endued with a forgiving
disposition, who are possessed of patience, who are prompt in performing
all righteous acts, and who are of auspicious conduct, succeed in
ascending to heaven. Those men who abstain from honey and meat, who
abstain from sexual congress with the spouses of other people, and who
abstain from wines and spirituous liquors, succeed in ascending to
heaven. Those men that help in the establishment of retreats for
ascetics, who become founders of families, O Bharata, who open up new
countries for purposes of habitation, and lay out towns and cities
succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who give away cloths and
ornaments, as also food and drink, and who help in marrying others,
succeed in ascending to heaven.[230] Those men that have abstained from
all kinds of injury or harm to all creatures, who are capable of enduring
everything, and who have made themselves the refuge of all creatures,
succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who wait with humility upon
their fathers and mothers, who have subjugated their senses, and who are
affectionate towards their brothers, succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men that subjugate their senses notwithstanding the fact of their
being rich in worldly goods and strong in might and in the enjoyment of
youth, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men that are kind towards
even those that offend against them, that are mild of disposition, that
have an affection for all who are of mild behaviour, and that contribute
to the happiness of others by rendering them every kind of service in
humility, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men that protect
thousands of people, that make gifts unto thousands of people, and that
rescue thousands of people from distress, succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men who make gifts of gold and of kine, O chief of Bharata's race,
as also those of conveyances and animals, succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men who make gifts of such articles as are needed in marriages, as
also those of serving men and maids, and cloths and robes, succeed in
ascending to heaven[231]. Those men who make public pleasure-houses and
gardens and wells, resting houses and buildings for public meetings and
tanks for enabling cattle and men to quench their thirst, and fields for
cultivation, O Bharata, succeed in ascending to heaven.[232] Those men
who make gifts of houses and fields and populated villages unto persons
that solicit them, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men who having
themselves manufactured juicy drinks of sweet taste and seeds and paddy
or rice, make gifts of them unto others succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men who being born in families high or low beget hundreds of
children and live long lives practising compassion and keeping wrath
under complete subjection, succeed in ascending to heaven. I have thus
expounded to thee, O Bharata, what the rites are in honour of the deities
and the Pitris which are performed by people for the sake of the other
world, what the ordinances are in respect of making gifts, and what the
views are of the Rishis of former times in respect of both the articles
of gift and the manner of giving them.'"



SECTION XXIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'O royal son of Bharata's race, it behoveth thee to
answer this question of mine truly and in detail. What are those
circumstances under which a person may become guilty of Brahmanicide
without actually slaying a Brahmana!'

"Bhishma said, 'Formerly, O monarch, I had one day requested Vyasa to
explain to me this very subject. I shall now narrate to thee what Vyasa
told me on that occasion. Do thou listen to it with undivided attention.
Repairing to the presence of Vyasa, I addressed him, saying,--Thou, O
great ascetic, art the fourth in descent from Vasishtha. Do thou explain
to me this. What are those circumstances under which one becomes guilty
of Brahmanicide without actually slaying a Brahmana,--Thus addressed by
me, the son of Parasara's loins, O king, well-skilled 'n the science of
morality, made me the following answer, at once excellent and fraught
with certainty, Thou shouldst know that man as guilty of Brahmanicide who
having of his own will invited a Brahmana of righteous conduct to his
house for giving him alms subsequently refuses to give anything to him on
the pretence of there being nothing in the house. Thou shouldst, O
Bharata, know that man as guilty of Brahmanicide who destroys the means
of living of a Brahmana learned in the Vedas and all their branches, and
who is freed from attachments to worldly creatures and goods. Thou
shouldst, O king, know that man to be guilty of Brahmanicide, who causes
obstructions in the way of thirsty kine while employed in quenching that
thirst. Thou shouldst take that man as guilty of Brahmanicide who,
without studying the Srutis that have flowed from preceptor to pupil for
ages and ages together, finds fault with the Srutis or with those
scriptures that have been composed by the Rishis. Thou shouldst know that
man as guilty of Brahmanicide who does not bestow upon a suitable
bride-groom his daughter possessed of beauty and other excellent
accomplishments. Thou shouldst know that foolish and sinful person to be
guilty of Brahmanicide who inflicts such grief upon Brahmanas as afflict
the very core of their hearts. Thou shouldst know that man to be guilty
of Brahmanicide who robs the blind, the lame, and idiots of their all.
Thou shouldst know that man to be guilty of Brahmanicide who sets fire to
the retreats of ascetics or to woods or to a village or a town.'"



SECTION XXV

"Yudhishthira said, 'It has been said that sojourns to sacred waters as
fraught with merit; that ablutions in such waters is meritorious; and
that listening to the excellence of such waters is also meritorious. I
desire to hear thee expatiate on this subject, O grandsire. It behoveth
thee, O chief of Bharata's race, to mention to me the sacred waters that
exist on this earth. I desire, O thou of great puissance, to hear thee
discourse on this topic.'

"Bhishma said, 'O thou of great splendour, the following enumeration of
the sacred waters on the Earth was made by Angiras. Blessed be thou, it
behoveth thee to listen to it for thou shalt then earn great merit. Once
on a time, Gautama of rigid vows, approaching the great and learned Rishi
Angiras endued with tranquillity of soul, while he was dwelling in a
forest, questioned him, saying,--O illustrious one, I have some doubts
regarding the merits attaching to sacred waters and shrines. So I desire
to hear thee discourse on that topic. Do thou, therefore, O ascetic,
discourse to me. What merits are earned by a person in respect of the
next world, by bathing in the sacred waters on the Earth, O thou of great
wisdom? Do thou expound to me this truly and according to the ordinance.'

"Angiras said, 'A person by bathing for seven days in succession in the
Chandrabhaga or the Vitasta whose waters are always seen to dance in
waves, observing a fast the while, is sure to become cleansed of all his
sins and endued with the merit of an ascetic.[233] The very many rivers
that flowing through Kasmira, fall into the great river called Sindhu
(Indus). By bathing in these rivers one is sure to become endued with
good character and to ascend to heaven after departing from this world.
By bathing in Pushkara, and Prabhasa, and Naimisha, and the ocean, and
Devika, and Indramarga, and Swarnavindu, one is sure to ascend to heaven
being seated on a celestial car, and filled with transports of joy at the
adorations of Apsara. By plunging in the waters of Hiranyavindu with a
concentrated mind and reverencing that sacred stream, and bathing next at
Kusesaya and Devendra, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins. Repairing
to Indratoya in the vicinity of the mountains of Gandhamadana and next to
Karatoya in the country called Kuranga, one should observe a fast for
three days and then bathe in those sacred waters with a concentrated
heart and pure body. By doing this, one is sure to acquire the merit of a
Horse-sacrifice. Bathing in Gangadwara and Kusavarta and Vilwaka in the
Nita mountains, as also in Kankhala, one is sure to become cleansed of
all one's sins and then ascend to heaven. If one becomes a Brahmacharin
and subdues one's wrath, devotes oneself to truth and practises
compassion towards all creatures, and then bathes in the Jala parda (Lake
of Waters), one is sure to acquire the merit of a Horse-sacrifice. That
part where Bhagirathi-Ganga flows in a northward direction is known as
the union of heaven, earth, and the nether regions. Observing a fast for
one month and bathing in that sacred Tirtha which is known to be
acceptable to Maheswara, one becomes competent to behold the deities. One
who gives oblations of water unto one's Pitris at Saptaganga and Triganga
and Indramarga, obtains ambrosia for food, if one has still to undergo
rebirth. The man who in a pure state of body and mind attends to his
daily Agnihotra and observes a fast for one month and then baths in
Mahasrama, is sure to attain success in one month. By bathing, after a
fast of three days and purifying the mind of all evil passions, in the
large lake of Bhrigu Kunda, one becomes cleansed of even the sin of
Brahmanicide. By bathing in Kanyakupa and performing one's ablutions in
Valaka, one acquires great fame among even the deities and shines in
glory. Bathing in Devika and the lake known by the name of Sundarika as
also in the Tirtha called Aswini, one acquires, in one's next life, great
beauty of form. By fasting for a fortnight and bathing in Mahaganga and
Krittikangaraka, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins and ascends to
heaven. Bathing in Vaimanika and Kinkinika, one acquires the power of
repairing everywhere at will and becomes an object of great respect in
the celestial region of the Apsaras.[234] If a person, subduing his wrath
and observing the vow of Brahmacharyya for three days, bathes in the
river Vipasa at the retreat called Kalika, he is sure to succeed in
transcending the obligation of rebirth. Bathing in the asylum that is
sacred to the Krittakas and offering oblations of water to the Pitris,
and then gratifying Mahadeva, one becomes pure in body and mind and
ascends to heaven. If one, observing a fast for three days with a
purified body and mind, bathes in Mahapura, one becomes freed from the
fear of all mobile and immobile animals as also of all animals having two
feet. By bathing in the Devadaru forest and offering oblations of water
to the Pitris and dwelling there for seven nights with a pure body and
mind, one attains to the region of the deities on departing from this
world. Bathing in the waterfalls at Sarastamva and Kusastambha and
Dronasarmapada, one is sure to attain to the region of the Apsaras where
one is waited upon with dutiful services by those superhuman beings. If
one, observing a fast, bathes at Chitrakuta and Janasthana and the waters
of Mandakini, one is sure to be united with prosperity that is
royal.[235] By repairing to the retreat that is known by the name of
Samya and residing there for a fortnight and bathing in the sacred water
that exists there, one acquires the power of disappearing at will (and
enjoy the happiness that has been ordained for the Gandharvas). Repairing
to the tirtha known by the name of Kausiki and residing there with a pure
heart and abstaining from all food and drink for three days, one acquires
the power of dwelling (in one's next life) in the happy region of the
Gandharvas. Bathing in the delightful tirtha that goes by the name of
Gandhataraka and residing there for one month, abstaining all the while
from food and drink, one acquires the power of disappearing at pleasure
and, then one and twenty days, of ascending to heaven. He that bathes in
the lake known by the name of Matanga is sure to attain to success in one
night. He that bathes in Analamva or in eternal Andhaka, or in Naimisha,
or the tirtha called Swarga, and offers oblations of water to the Pitris,
subduing his senses the while, acquires the Merit of a human
sacrifice.[236] Bathing in Ganga hrada and the tirtha known by the name
of Utpalavana and daily offering oblations of water there for a full
month to the Pitris, one acquires the merit of a Horse-sacrifice. Bathing
in the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna as also at the tirtha in
the Kalanjara mountains and offering every day oblations of water to the
Pitris for a full month, one acquires the merit that attaches to ten
Horse-sacrifices. Bathing in the Shashthi lake one acquires merit much
greater than what is attached to the gift of food. Ten thousand tirthas
and thirsty millions of other tirthas come to Prayaga (the confluence of
Ganga and Yamuna), O chief of Bharata's race in the month of Magha. He
who bathes in Prayaga, with a restrained soul and observing rigid vows
the while, in the month of Magha, becomes cleansed of all his sins, O
chief of Bharata's race, and attains to heaven. Bathing in the tirtha
that is sacred to the Maruts, as also in that which is situate in the
retreat of the Pitris, and also in that which is known by the name of
Vaivaswata, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins and becomes as pure
and sanctified as a tirtha. Repairing to Brahmasaras as also to the
Bhagirathi and bathing there and offering oblations to the Pitris every
day for a full month, abstaining from food all the while, one is sure to
attain to the region of Soma, Bathing in Utpataka and then in Ashtavakra
and offering oblations of water to the Pitris every day for twelve days
in succession, abstaining the while from food, one acquires the merits of
a Horse-sacrifice. Bathing in Asmaprishtha and Niravinda mountains and
Kraunchapadi,--all three in Gaya--one becomes cleansed of the sin of
Brahmanicide. A bath in the first place cleanses one of a single
Brahmanicide; a bath in the second cleanses one of two offences of that
character; and a bath in the third cleanses one of three such offences.
Bathing in Kalavinga, one acquires a large quantity of water (for use in
the next world). A man, by bathing in the city of Agni, acquires such
merit as entitles him to live during his next birth in the city of Agni's
daughter. Bathing in Visala in Karavirapura and offering oblations of
water unto one's Pitris, and performing one's ablutions in Devahrada too,
one becomes identified with Brahma and shines in glory as such. Bathing
in Punaravarta-nanda as also Mahananda, a man of restrained senses and
universal compassion repairs to the celestial gardens called Nandana of
Indra and is waited upon there by Apsaras of diverse tribes. Bathing with
concentrated soul in the tirtha that is called after the name of Urvasi
and that is situate in the river Lohitya, on the day of full moon of the
month of Kartika, one attains to the merits that attach to the sacrifice
called Pundarika. Bathing in Ramahrada and offering oblations of water to
the Pitris in the river Vipasa (Beas), and observing a fast for twelve
days, one becomes cleansed of all sins. Bathing in the tirtha called
Maha-hrada with a purified heart and after observing a fast for one
month, one is sure to attain to the end which was the sage Jamadagni's.
By exposing oneself to heat in the tirtha called Vindhya, a person
devoted to truth and endued with compassion for all creatures should then
betake himself to austere penances, actuated by humility. By so doing, he
is sure to attain to ascetic success in course of a single month. Bathing
in the Narmada as also in the tirtha known by the name of Surparaka,
observing a fast for a full fortnight, one is sure to become in one's
next birth a prince of the royal line. If one proceeds with restrained
senses and a concentrated soul to the tirtha known under the name of
Jamvumarga, one is sure to attain to success in course of a single day
and night. By repairing to Chandalikasrama and bathing in the tirtha
called Kokamukha, having subsisted for sometime on potherbs alone and
worn rags for vestments, one is sure to obtain ten maidens of great
beauty for one's spouses. One who lives by the side of the tirtha known
by the name of Kanya-hrada has never to go to the regions of Yama. Such a
person is sure to ascend to the regions of felicity that belong to the
celestials. One who bathes with restrained senses on the day of the new
moon in the tirtha known by the name of Prabhasa, is sure, O thou of
mighty arms, of at once attaining to success and immortality. Bathing in
the tirtha known by the name of Ujjanaka which occurs in the retreat of
Arshtisena's son, and next in the tirtha that is situate in the retreat
of Pinga, one is sure to be cleansed of all one's sins. Observing a fast
for three days and bathing in the tirtha known as Kulya and reciting the
sacred mantras that go by the name of Aghamarshana, one attains the merit
of a horse-sacrifice. Observing a fast for one night and bathing in
Pindaraka, one becomes purified on the dawn of the next day and attains
to the merit of an Agnishtoma sacrifice. One who repairs to Brahmasara
which is adorned by the woods called Dharmaranya, becomes cleansed of all
one's sins and attains to the merit of the Pundarika sacrifice. Bathing
in the waters of the Mainaka mountain and saying one's morning and
evening prayers there and living at the spot for a month, restraining
desire, one attains to the merit of all the sacrifices. Setting out for
Kalolaka and Nandikunda and Uttara-manasa, and reaching a spot that is
hundred yojanas remote from any of them, one becomes cleansed of the sin
of foeticide, One who succeeds in obtaining a sight of image of
Nandiswara, becomes cleansed of all sins. Bathing in the tirtha called
Swargamarga one is sure to proceed to the regions of Brahman. The
celebrated Himavat is sacred. That prince of mountains is the
father-in-law of Sankara. He is a mine of all jewels and gems and is the
resort of the Siddhas and Charanas. That regenerate person who is fully
conversant with the Vedas and who, regarding this life to be exceedingly
unstable, casts off his body on those mountains, abstaining from all food
and drink in accordance with the rites laid down in the scriptures, after
having adored the deities and bent his head in worship of the ascetics,
is sure to attain to success and proceed to the eternal regions of
Brahman. There is nothing unattainable to him who resides in a tirtha,
restraining lust and subjugating wrath, in consequence of such residence.
For the purpose of repairing to all the tirthas in the world, one should
mentally think of those amongst them that are almost inaccessible or
sojourns to which are attended with insurmountable difficulties. Sojourns
to tirthas is productive of the merits of sacrifices. They are competent
to cleanse everybody of sin. Fraught with great excellence, they are
capable of leading to heaven. The subject is truly a great mystery. The
very deities should bathe in tirthas. To them also they are
sin-cleansing. This discourse on tirthas should be imparted to Brahmanas,
and to such honest or righteous persons as are bent upon achieving what
is for their own good. It should also be recited in the hearing of one's
well-wishers and friends and of one's obedient and devoted disciples.
Angiras possessed of great ascetic merit, had imparted this discourse to
Gautama. Angiras himself had obtained it from Kasyapa of great
intelligence. The great Rishi regard this discourse as worthy of constant
repetition. It is the foremost of all cleansing things. If one recites it
regularly every day, one is sure to become cleansed of every sin and to
proceed to heaven after the termination of this life. One who listens to
this discourse recited in his hearing,--this discourse, viz., of Angiras,
that is regarded as a mystery,--is sure to attain in one's next life to
be born in a good family and, what is more, one would become endued with
the memory of one's previous existence.'"



SECTION XXVI

"Vaisampayana said,--'Equal unto Vrihaspati in intelligence and Brahma
himself in forgiveness, resembling Sakra in prowess and Surya in energy,
Bhishma the son of Ganga, of infinite might, had been overthrown in
battle by Arjuna. Accompanied by his brothers and many other people, king
Yudhisthira asked him these questions. The old hero was lying on a bed
that is coveted by heroes, in expectation of that auspicious time when he
could take leave of the physical frame. Many great Rishis had come there
for seeing that foremost one of Bharata's race. Amongst them were Atri
and Vasishtha and Bhrigu and Pulastya and Pulaha and Kratu. There were
also Angiras and Gotama and Agastya and Sumati of well-restrained soul,
and Viswamitra and Sthulasiras and Samvarta and Pramati and Dama. There
were also Vrihaspati and Usanas, and Vyasa and Chyavana and Kasyapa and
Dhruva, and Durvasas and Jamadagni and Markandeya and Galava, and
Bharadwaja and Raibhya and Yavakrita and Trita. There were Sthulaksha and
Savalaksha and Kanwa and Medhatithi and Krisa and Narada and Parvata and
Sudhanwa and Ekata and Dwita. There were also Nitambhu and Bhuvana and
Dhaumya and Satananda and Akritavrana and Rama, the son of Jamadagni and
Kacha. All these high-souled and great Rishis came there for seeing
Bhishma lying on his bed of arrows. Yudhishthira with his brothers duly
worshipped those high-souled Rishis who had come there, one after another
in proper order. Receiving that worship, those foremost of Rishis sat
themselves down and began to converse with one another. Their
conversation related to Bhishma, and was highly sweet and agreeable to
all the senses. Hearing that talk of theirs having reference to himself,
Bhishma became filled with delight and regarded himself to be already in
heaven. Those Rishis then, having obtained the leave of Bhishma and of
the Pandava princes, made themselves invisible, vanishing in the very
sight of all the beholders. The Pandavas repeatedly bowed and offered
their adorations to those highly blessed Rishis, even after they had made
themselves invisible. They then with cheerful souls waited upon the son
of Ganga, even as Brahmanas versed in Mantras wait with reverence upon
the rising Sun. The Pandavas beheld that the points of the compass blazed
forth with splendour in consequence of the energy of their penances, and
became filled with wonder at the sight. Thinking of the high blessedness
and puissance of those Rishis, the Pandava princes began to converse on
the subject with their grandsire Bhishma."

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The conversation being over, the righteous
Yudhishthira, the son of Pandu; touched Bhishma's feet with his head and
then resumed his questions relating to morality and righteousness.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Which countries, which provinces, which retreats,
which mountains, and which rivers, O grandsire, are the foremost in point
of sanctity?'

"Bhishma said, "In this connection is cited the old narrative of a
conversation between a Brahmana in the observance of the Sila and the
Unccha vows, O Yudhishthira, and a Rishi crowned with ascetic success.
Once on a time, a foremost person, having roamed over this entire earth
adorned with mountains, arrived at last in the house of a foremost person
leading the domestic mode of life in accordance with the Sila vow. The
latter welcomed his guest with due rites. Received with such hospitality,
the happy Rishi passed the night happily in the house of his host. The
next morning the Brahmana in the observance of the Sila vow, having
finished all his morning acts and rites and purified himself duly, very
cheerfully approached his guest crowned with ascetic success. Meeting
with each other and seated at their ease, the two began to converse on
agreeable subjects connected with the Vedas and the Upanishads. Towards
the conclusion of the discourse, the Brahmana in the observance of the
Sila vow respectfully addressed the Rishi crowned with success. Endued
with intelligence, he put this very question which thou, O Yudhisthira,
hast put to me.'

"The poor Brahmana said, 'What countries, what provinces, what retreats,
what mountains, and what rivers should be regarded as the foremost in
point of sanctity? Do thou discourse to me on this.'

"The Rishi crowned with success said, 'Those countries, those provinces,
those retreats, and those mountains, should be regarded as the foremost
in point of sanctity through which or by the side of which that foremost
of all rivers, viz., Bhagirathi flows. That end which a creature is
capable of attaining by penances, by Brahmacharyya, by sacrifices, or by
practising renunciation, one is sure to attain by only living by the side
of the Bhagirathi and bathing in its sacred waters. Those creatures whose
bodies have been sprinkled with the sacred waters of Bhagirathi or whose
bones have been laid in the channel of that sacred stream, have not to
fall away--from heaven at any time.[237] Those men, O learned Brahmana,
who use the waters of Bhagirathi in all their acts, surely ascend to
heaven after departing from this world. Even those men who, having
committed diverse kinds of sinful deeds in the first part of their lives,
betake themselves in after years to a residing by the side of Ganga,
succeed in attaining to a very superior end. Hundreds of sacrifices
cannot produce that merit which men of restrained souls are capable of
acquiring by bathing in the sacred waters of Ganga. A person is treated
with respect and worshipped in heaven for as long a period as his bones
lie in the channel of the Ganga. Even as the Sun, when he rises at the
dawn of day, blazes forth in splendour, having dispelled the gloom of
night, after the same manner the person that has bathed in the waters of
Ganga is seen to shine in splendour, cleansed of all his sins. Those
countries and those points of the compass that are destitute of the
sacred waters of Ganga are like nights without the moon or like trees
without flowers. Verily, a world without Ganga is like the different
orders and modes of life when they are destitute of righteousness or like
sacrifices without Soma. Without doubt, countries and points of the
compass that are without Ganga are like the firmament without the Sun, or
the Earth without mountains, or the welkin without air. The entire body
of creatures in the three worlds, if served with the auspicious waters of
Ganga, derive a pleasure, the like of which they are incapable of
deriving from any other source. He who drinks Ganga water that has been
heated by the Sun's rays derives merit much greater than that which
attaches to the vow of subsisting upon the wheat or grains of other corn
picked up from cowdung. It cannot be said whether the two are equal or
not, viz., he who performs a thousand Chandrayana rites for purifying his
body and he who drinks the water of Ganga. It cannot be said whether the
two are equal or not, viz., one who stands for a thousand years on one
foot and one who lives for only a month by the side of Ganga. One who
lives permanently by the side of Ganga is superior in merit to one who
stays for ten thousand Yugas with head hanging downwards. As cotton, when
it comes into contact with fire, is burnt off without a remnant, even so
the sins of the person that has bathed in Ganga become consumed without a
remnant. There is no end superior to Ganga for those creatures who with
hearts afflicted by sorrow, seek to attain to ends that may dispel that
sorrow of theirs. As snakes become deprived of their poison at the very
sight of Garuda, even so one becomes cleansed of all one's sins at the
very sight of the sacred stream of Ganga. They that are without good name
and that are addicted to deeds of sinfulness, have Ganga for their fame,
their protection, their means of rescue, their refuge or cover. Many
wretches among men who become afflicted with diverse sins of a heinous
nature, when they are about to sink into hell, are rescued by Ganga in
the next world (if, notwithstanding their sins, they seek the aid of
Ganga in their after-years). They, O foremost of intelligent men, who
plunge every day in the sacred waters of Ganga, become the equals of
great Munis and the very deities with Vasava at their head. Those
wretches among men that are destitute of humility or modesty of behaviour
and that are exceedingly sinful, become righteous and good, O Brahmana,
by betaking themselves to the side of Ganga. As Amrita is to the deities,
as Swadha is to the Pritis, as Sudha is to the Nagas, even so is Ganga
water to human beings. As children afflicted with hunger solicit their
mothers for food, after the same manner do people desirous of their
highest good pay court to Ganga. As the region of the self-born Brahma is
said to be the foremost of all places, even so is Ganga said to be
foremost of all rivers for those that desire to bathe. As the Earth and
the cow are said to be the chief sustenance of the deities and other
celestials, even so is Ganga the chief sustenance of all living
creatures.[238] As the deities support themselves upon the Amrita that
occurs in the Sun and the Moon and that is offered in diverse sacrifices,
even so do human beings support themselves upon Ganga water. One
besmeared with the sand taken from the shores of Ganga regards oneself as
a denizen of heaven, adorned with celestial unguents. He who bears on his
head the mud taken from the banks of Ganga presents an effulgent aspect
equal to that of Sun himself bent on dispelling the surrounding darkness.
When that wind which is moistened with the particles of Ganga-water
touches one's person, it cleanses him immediately of every sin. A person
afflicted by calamities and about to sink under their weight, finds all
his calamities dispelled by the joy which springs up in his heart at
sight of that sacred stream. By the melody of the swans and Kokas and
other aquatic fowls that play on her breast, Ganga challenges the very
Gandharvas and by her high banks the very mountains on the Earth.
Beholding her surface teeming with swans and diverse other aquatic fowls,
and having banks adorned with pasture lands with kine grazing on them.
Heaven herself loses her pride. The high happiness which one enjoys by a
residence on the banks of Ganga, can never be his who is residing even in
heaven. I have no doubt in this that the person who is afflicted with
sins perpetrated in speech and thought and overt act, becomes cleansed at
the very sight of Ganga. By holding that sacred stream, touching it, and
bathing in its waters, one rescues one's ancestors to the seventh
generation, one's descendants to the seventh generation, as also other
ancestors and descendant. By hearing of Ganga, by wishing to repair to
that river, by drinking its waters, by touching its waters, and by
bathing in them a person rescues both his paternal and maternal races. By
seeing, touching, and drinking the waters of Ganga, or even by applauding
Ganga, hundreds and thousands of sinful men became cleansed of all their
sins. They who wish to make their birth, life and learning fruitful,
should repair to Ganga and gratify the Pitris and the deities by offering
them oblations of water. The merit that one earns by bathing in Ganga is
such that the like of it is incapable of being earned through the
acquisition of sons or wealth or the performance of meritorious acts.
Those who, although possessed of the physical ability, do not seek to
have a sight of the auspicious Ganga of sacred current, are, without
doubt, to be likened to persons afflicted with congenital blindness or
those that are dead or those that are destitute of the power of
locomotion through palsy or lameness. What man is there that would not
reverence this sacred stream that is adored by great Rishis conversant
with the Present, the Past, and the Future, as also by the very deities
with Indra at their head. What man is there that would not seek the
protection of Ganga whose protection is sought for by forest recluses and
householders, and by Yatis and Brahmacharins alike? The man of righteous
conduct who, with rapt soul, thinks of Ganga at the time when his
life-breaths are about to leave his body, succeeds in attaining to the
highest end. That man who dwells by the side of Ganga up to the time of
his death, adoring her with reverence, becomes freed from the fear of
every kind of calamity, of sin, and of kings. When that highly sacred
stream fell from the firmament. Maheswara held it on his head. It is that
very stream which is adored in heaven.[239] The three regions, viz.,
(Earth, Heaven, and the nether place called Patala) are adorned by the
three courses of this sacred stream. The man who uses the waters of that
stream becomes certainly crowned with success. As the solar ray is to the
deities in heaven, as Chandramas is to the Pitris, as the king is to
human beings, even such is Ganga unto all streams.[240] One who becomes
bereaved of mother or father or sons or spouses or wealth does not fell
that grief which becomes one's, when one becomes bereaved of Ganga. One
does not obtain that joy through acts that lead to the region of Brahma,
or through such sacrifices and rites that lead to heaven, or through
children or wealth, which one obtain from a sight of Ganga.[241] The
pleasures that men derive from a sight of Ganga is equal to what they
derive from a sight of the full moon. That man becomes dear to Ganga who
adores her with deep devotion, with mind wholly fixed upon her, with a
reverence that refuses to take any other object within its sphere, with a
feeling that there is nothing else to the universe worthy of similar
adoration, and with a steadiness that knows no failing away. Creatures
that live on Earth, in the welkin, or in Heaven, indeed, even beings that
are very superior,--should always bathe in Ganga. Verily, this is the
foremost of all duties with those that are righteous. The fame of Ganga
for sanctity has spread over the entire universe, since she bore all the
sons of Sagara, who had been reduced to ashes, from here to Heaven.[242]
Men who are washed by the bright, beautiful, high, and rapidly moving
waves, raised by the wind, of Ganga, became cleansed of all their sins
and resemble in splendour the Sun with his thousand rays. Those men of
tranquil souls that have cast off their bodies in the waters of Ganga
whose sanctity is as great as that of the butter and other liquids poured
in sacrifices and which are capable of conferring merits equal to those
of the greatest of sacrifices, have certainly attained to a station equal
to that of the very deities. Verily, Ganga, possessed of fame and vast
extent and identical with the entire universe and reverenced by the
deities with Indra at their head, the Munis and human beings, is
competent to bestow the fruition of all their wishes upon them that are
blind, them that are idiots, and them that are destitute of all
things.[243] They that sought the refuge of Ganga, that protectress of
all the universe, that flows in three streams, that is filled with water
at once highly sacred and sweet as honey and productive of every kind of
good, have succeeded in attaining to the beatitude of Heaven.[244] That
mortal who dwells by the side of Ganga and beholds her every day, becomes
cleansed by her sight and touch. Unto him the deities give every kind of
happiness here and a high end hereafter. Ganga is regarded as competent
to rescue every creature from sin and lead him to the felicity of Heaven.
She is held to be identical with Prisni, the mother of Vishnu. She is
identical with the Word or Speech. She is very remote, being incapable of
easy attainment. She is the embodiment of auspiciousness and prosperity.
She is capable of bestowing the six well-known attributes beginning with
lordship or puissance. She is always inclined to extend her grace. She is
the displayer of all things in the universe, and she is the high refuge
of all creatures. Those who have sought her protection in this life have
surely attained heaven. The fame of Ganga has spread all over the welkin,
and Heaven, and Earth, and all the points, cardinal and subsidiary, of
the compass. Mortal creatures, by using the waters of that foremost of
streams, always become crowned with high success. That person who himself
beholding Ganga, points her out to others, finds that Ganga rescues him
from rebirth and confers Emancipation on him. Ganga held Guha, the
generalissimo of the celestial forces, in her womb. She bears the most
precious of all metals, viz., gold, also in that womb of hers. They who
bathe in her waters every day in the morning, succeed in obtaining the
aggregate of three, viz., Righteousness, Wealth and Pleasure. Those
waters are, again, equal in point of sanctity to the butter that is
poured with Mantras on the sacrificial fire. Capable of cleansing one
from every sin, she has descended from the celestial region, and her
current is held in high esteem by every one. Ganga is the daughter of
Himavat, the spouse of Hara, and the ornament of both Heaven and Earth.
She is the bestower of everything auspicious, and is competent to confer
the six well-known attributes beginning with lordship or puissance.
Verily O king, Ganga is the one object of great sanctity in the three
worlds and confers merit upon all. Truly, O monarch, Ganga is
Righteousness in liquefied form. She is energy also running in a liquid
form over the Earth. She is endued with the splendour or puissance that
belongs to the butter that is poured with Mantras on the sacrificial
fire. She is always adorned with large waves as also with Brahmanas who
may at all times be seen performing their ablutions in her waters.
Falling from Heaven, she was held by Siva on his head. The very mother of
the heavens, she has sprung from the highest mountain for running over
the plains and conferring the most precious benefits on all creatures of
the Earth. She is the highest cause of all things; she is perfectly
stainless. She is as subtile as Brahma. She affords the best bed for the
dying. She leads creatures very quickly to heaven. She bears away a large
volume of water. She bestows great fame on all. She is the protectress of
the universe.[245] She is identical with every form. She is very much
coveted by persons crowned with success. Verily, Ganga is the path to
Heaven of those that have bathed in her current.[246] The Brahmanas hold
Ganga as equalling the Earth in forgiveness, and in the protection and
upholding of those that live by her; further, as equalling Fire and Surya
in energy and splendour; and, lastly, as always equalling Guha himself in
the matter of showing favours unto the regenerate class.[247] Those men
who, in this life, even mentally seek with their whole souls that sacred
stream which is praised by the Rishis, which has issued out of the feet
of Vishnu, which is very ancient, and which is exceedingly sacred,
succeed in repairing to the regions of Brahman. Fully convinced that
children and other possessions, as also regions possessed by every kind
of felicity, are transitory or liable to destruction, men of subdued
souls, who are desirous of attaining to that everlasting station which is
identical with Brahma, always pay their adorations to Ganga with that
reverence and love which are due from a son to mother. The men of
cleansed soul who is desirous of achieving success should seek the
protection of Ganga who is like a cow that yields Amrita instead of
ordinary milk, who is prosperity's self, who is possessed of omniscience,
who exists for the entire universe of creatures, who is the source of all
kinds of food, who is the mother of all mountains, who is the refuge of
all righteous persons, who is immeasurable in puissance and energy, and
who charms the heart of Brahma himself. Having, with austere penances,
gratified all the deities with the Supreme Lord (Vishnu), Bhagiratha
brought Ganga down on the Earth. Repairing unto her, men always succeed
in freeing themselves from every kind of fear both here and hereafter.
Observing with the aid of intelligence, I have mentioned to thee only a
small part of the merits of Ganga. My power, however, is inadequate to
speak of all the merits of the sacred river, or, indeed, to measure her
puissance and sanctity. One may, by putting forth one's best powers,
count the stones that occur in the mountains of Meru or measure the
waters that occur in the ocean, but one cannot count all the merits which
belong to the waters of Ganga. Hence, having listened to these particular
merits of Ganga which I have uttered with great devotion, one should, in
thought, word and deed, reverence them with faith and devotion. In
consequence of thy having listened to those merits which I have recited,
thou art sure to fill all the three regions with fame and attain to a
measure of success that is very large and that is difficult of being
attained to by any other person. Verily, thou shalt, soon after that,
sport in joy many a region of great felicity created by Ganga herself for
those that reverence her. Ganga always extends her grace unto those that
are devoted to her with humbleness of heart. She unites those that are so
devoted to her with every kind of happiness. I pray that the
highly-blessed Ganga may always inspire thy heart and mine with such
attributes as are fraught with righteousness'.

"Bhishma continued, 'The learned ascetic endued with high intelligence
and great illumination, and crowned with success, having in this manner
discoursed unto that poor Brahmana in the observance of the Sila vow, on
the subjects of the infinite merits of Ganga, then ascended the
firmament. The Brahmana in the observance of Sila vow, awakened by the
words of that ascetic crowned with success, duly worshipped Ganga and
attained to high success. Do thou also, O son of Kunti, seek Ganga with
great devotion, for thou shalt then, as the reward thereof, attain to
high and excellent success.

"Vaisampayana continued 'Hearing this discourse from Bhishma that was
fraught with the praise of Ganga, Yudhishthira with his brothers became
filled with great delight. That person who recites or hears recited this
sacred discourse fraught with the praise of Ganga, becomes cleansed of
every sin.'"



SECTION XXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou O grandsire, art endued with wisdom and
knowledge of the scriptures, with conduct and behaviour, with diverse
kinds of excellent attributes, and also with years. Thou art
distinguished above others by intelligence and wisdom and penances. I
shall, therefore, O thou that art the foremost of all righteous men,
desire to address enquiries to thee respecting Righteousness. There is
not another man, O king, in all the worlds, who is worthier of being
questioned on such subjects. O best of kings, how may one, if he happens
to be a Kshatriya or a Vaisya or a Sudra, succeed in acquiring the status
of a Brahmana? It behoveth thee to tell me the means. Is it by penances
the most austere, or by religious acts, or by knowledge of the
scriptures, that a person belonging to any of the three inferior orders
succeeds in acquiring the status of a Brahmana? Do tell me this, O
grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'The status of a Brahmana, O Yudhishthira, is incapable of
acquisition by a person belonging to any of the three other orders. That
status is the highest with respect to all creatures. Travelling through
innumerable orders of existence, by undergoing repeated births, one at
last, in some birth, becomes born as a Brahmana. In this connection is
cited an old history, O Yudhishthira, of a conversation between Matanga
and a she-ass. Once on a time a Brahmana obtained a son who, though
procreated by a person belonging to a different order, had, however, the
rites of infancy and youth performed in pursuance of the ordinances laid
down for Brahmanas. The child was called by the name of Matanga and was
possessed of every accomplishment. His father, desiring to perform a
sacrifice, ordered him, O scorcher of foes, to collect the articles
required for the act. Having received the command of his father, he set
out for the purpose, riding on a car of great speed, drawn by an ass. It
so happened that the ass yoked unto that car was of tender years. Instead
therefore, of obeying the reins, the animal bore away the car to the
vicinity of its dam, viz., the she-ass that had brought it forth.
Matanga, dissatisfied with this, began to strike repeatedly the animal
with his goad on its nose. Beholding those marks of violence on her
child's nose, the she-ass, full of affection for him, said--Do not
grieve, O child, for his treatment. A chandala it is that is driving
thee. There is no severity in a Brahmana. The Brahmana is said to be the
friend of all creatures. He is the teacher also of all creatures and
their ruler. Can he chastise any creature so cruelly? This fellow,
however, is of sinful deeds. He hath no compassion to show unto even a
creature of such tender years as thou. He is simply proving the order of
his birth by conducting himself in this way. The nature which he hath
derived from his sire forbids the rise of those sentiments of pity and
kindness that are natural to the Brahmana. Hearing these harsh words of
the she-ass, Matanga quickly, came down from the car and addressing the
she-ass, said,--Tell me, O blessed dame, by what fault is my mother
stained? How dost thou know that I am a Chandala? Do thou answer me
without delay. How, indeed, dost thou know that I am a Chandala? How has
my status as a Brahmana been lost? O thou of great wisdom, tell me all
this in detail, from beginning to end.'

"The she-ass said, Begotten thou wert, upon a Brahmana woman excited with
desire, by a Sudra following the profession of a barber. Thou art,
therefore, a Chandala by birth. The status of Brahmana thou hast not at
all.'

"Brahmana continued, 'Thus addressed by the she-ass, Matanga retraced his
way homewards. Seeing him return, his father said,--I had employed thee
in the difficult task of gathering the requisites of my intended
sacrifice. Why hast thou come back without having accomplished thy
charge? Is it the case that all is not right with thee?

"Matanga said, 'How can he who belongs to no definite order of birth, or
to an order that is very low be regarded as all right and happy? How, O
father, can that person be happy whose mother is stained? O father, this
she-ass, who seems to be more than a human being, tells me that I have
been begotten upon a Brahmani woman by a Sudra. I shall, for this reason,
undergo the severest penances.--Having said these words to his father,
and firmly resolved upon what he had said he proceeded to the great
forest and began to undergo the austerest of penances. Setting himself to
the performance of those penances for the purpose of happily acquiring
the status of a Brahmana, Matanga began to scorch the very deities by the
severity of his asceticism. Unto him thus engaged in penances, the chief
of the celestials, viz., Indra, appeared and said,--Why, O Matanga, dost
thou pass thy time in such grief, abstaining from all kinds of human
enjoyments? I shall give thee boons. Do thou name the boons thou
desirest. Do not delay, but tell me what is in thy breast. Even if that
be unattainable, I shall yet bestow it on thee.'

"Matanga said, 'Desirous of attaining to the status of Brahmana I have
begun to practise these penances. After having obtained it, I shall go
home. Even this is the boon solicited by me.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of his, Purandara said unto him.
The status of a Brahmana, O Matanga, which thou desirest to acquire is
really unattainable by thee. It is true, thou desirest to acquire it, but
then it is incapable of acquisition by persons begotten on uncleansed
souls. O thou of foolish understanding, thou art sure to meet with
destruction if thou persistest in this pursuit. Desist, therefore, from
this vain endeavour without any delay. This object of thy desire, viz.,
the status of a Brahmana, which is the foremost of everything, is
incapable of being won by penances. Therefore, by coveting that foremost
status, thou wilt incur sure destruction. One born as a Chandala can
never attain to that status which is regarded as the most sacred among
the deities and Asuras and human beings!'"



SECTION XXVIII

"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed by Indra, Matanga of restrained vows and
well regulated soul, (without hearkening to the counsels of the chief of
the celestials), stood for a hundred years on one foot, O thou of
unfading glory. Sakra of great fame once more appeared before him and
addressing him, said,--The status of a Brahmana, O child, is
unattainable. Although thou covetest it, it is impossible for thee to
obtain it. O Matanga, by coveting that very high status thou art sure to
be destroyed. Do not, O son, betray such rashness. This cannot be a
righteous path for thee to follow. O thou of foolish understanding, it is
impossible for thee to obtain it in this world. Verily, by coveting that
which is unattainable, thou art sure to meet with destruction in no time.
I am repeatedly forbidding thee. By striving, however, to attain that
high status by the aid of thy penances, notwithstanding my repeated
admonition, thou art sure to meet with destruction. From the order of
brute life one attains to the status of humanity. If born as human being,
he is sure to take birth as a Pukkasa or a Chandala. Verily, one having
taken birth in that sinful order of existence, viz., Pukkasa, one, O
Matanga, has to wander in it for a very long time. Passing a period of
one thousand years in that order, one attains next to the status of a
Sudra. In the Sudra order, again, one has to wander for a long time.
After thirty thousand years one acquire the status of a Vaisya. There, in
that order, one has to pass a very long period. After a time that is
sixty times longer than what has been stated as the period of Sudra
existence, one becomes a person of the fighting order. In the Kshatriya
order one has to pass a very long time. After a time that is measured by
multiplying the period last referred to by sixty, one becomes born as a
fallen Brahmana. In this order one has to wander for a long period. After
a time measured by multiplying the period last named by two hundred, one
becomes born in the race of such a Brahmana as lives by the profession of
arms. There, in that order, one has to wander for a long period. After a
time measured by multiplying the period last named by three hundred, one
takes birth in the race of a Brahmana that is given to the recitation of
the Gayatri and other sacred Mantras. There, in that order, one has to
wander for a long period. After a time measured by multiplying the period
last named by four hundred, one takes birth in the race of such a
Brahmana as is conversant with the entire Vedas and the scriptures,
There, in that order, one has to wander for a very long period. While
wandering in that status of existence, joy and grief, desire and
aversion, vanity and evil speech, seek to enter into him and make a
wretch of him. If he succeeds in subjugating those foes, he then attains
a high end. If, on the other hand, those enemies succeed in subjugating
him, he falls down from that high status like a person falling down on
the ground from the high top of a palmyra tree. Knowing this for certain,
O Matanga, I say unto thee, do thou name some other boon, for the status
of a Brahmana is incapable of being attained by thee (that hast been born
as a Chandala)!'



SECTION XXIX

"Bhishma said, 'Thus advised by Indra, Matanga, observant of vows,
refused, to hear what he was bid. On the other hand, with regulated vows
and cleansed soul, he practised austere penances by standing on one foot
for a thousand years, and was deeply engaged in Yoga-meditation. After a
thousand years had passed away, Sakra once more came to see him. Indeed,
the slayer of Vala and Vritra said unto him the same words.'

'Matanga said, 'I have passed these thousand years, standing on one foot,
in deep meditation, observing of the vow of Brahmacharyya. Why is it that
I have not yet succeeded in acquiring the status of a Brahmana?'

'Sakra said, 'One born on a Chandala cannot, by any means acquire the
status of a Brahmana. Do thou, therefore name some boon so that all this
labour of thine may not prove fruitless--Thus addressed by the chief of
the celestials, Matanga became filled with grief. He repaired to Prayaga,
and passed there a hundred years, standing all the while on his toes. In
consequence of the observance of such Yoga which was extremely difficult
to bear, he became very much emaciated and his arteries and veins became
swollen and visible. He was reduced to only skin and bones. Indeed, it
has been heard by us that the righteous-souled Matanga, while practising
those austerities at Gaya, dropped down on the ground from sheer
exhaustion. The lord and giver of boons, engaged in the good of all
creatures, viz., Vasava beholding him falling down, quickly came to that
spot and held him fast.'

"Sakra said, 'It seems, O Matanga, that the status of a Brahmana which
thou seekest is ill-suited to thee. That status is incapable of being
attained by thee. Verily, in thy case, it is surrounded by many dangers.
A person by worshipping a Brahmana obtains happiness; while by abstaining
from such worship, he obtains grief and misery. The Brahmana is, with
respect to all creatures, the giver of what they prize or covet and the
protector of what they already have. It is through the Brahmanas that the
Pitris and the deities become gratified. The Brahmana, O Matanga, is said
to be foremost of all created Beings. The Brahmana grants all objects
that are desired and in the way they are desired?[248] Wandering through
innumerable orders of Being and undergoing repeated rebirths, one
succeeds in some subsequent birth in acquiring the status of a Brahmana.
That status is really incapable of being obtained by persons of
uncleansed souls. Do thou, therefore, give up the idea. Do thou name some
other boon. The particular boon which thou seekest is incapable of being
granted to thee.'

"Matanga said, 'Afflicted as I am with grief, why, O Sakra, dost thou
afflict me further (with such speeches as these)? Thou art striking one
that is already dead, by this behaviour. I do not pity thee for having
acquired the status of a Brahmana thou now failest to retain it (for thou
hast no compassion to show for one like me). O thou of a hundred
sacrifices, the status of a Brahmana as thou sayest be really
unattainable by any of the three other orders, yet, men that have
succeeded in acquiring (through natural means) that high status do not
adhere to it (for what sins do net even Brahmanas commit). Those who
having acquired the status of a Brahmana that, like affluence, is so
difficult to acquire, do not seek to keep it up (by practising the
necessary duties), must be regarded to be the lowest of wretches in this
world. Indeed, they are the most sinful of all creatures. Without doubt,
the status of a Brahmana is exceedingly difficult to attain, and once
being attained, it is difficult to maintain it. It is capable of
dispelling every kind of grief. Alas, having attained to it, men do not
always seek to keep it up (by practising righteousness and the other
duties that attach to it). When even such persons are regarded as
Brahmanas why is it that I, who am contented with my own self, who am
above all couples of opposites, who am dissociated from all worldly
objects, who am observant of the duty of compassion towards all creatures
and of self-restraint of conduct, should not be regarded as deserving of
that status.[249] How unfortunate I am, O Purandara, that through the
fault of my mother I have been reduced to this condition, although I am
not unrighteous in my behaviour? Without doubt, Destiny is incapable of
being warded off or conquered by individual exertion, since, O lord, I am
unable to acquire, notwithstanding these persistent efforts of mine, the
object, upon the acquisition of which I have set my heart. When such is
the case, O righteous one, it behoves thee to grant me some other boon
if, indeed, I have become worthy of thy grace or if I have a little of
merit.'

"Bhishma continued, 'The slayer of Vala and Vritra then said unto
him,--Do thou name the boon.--Thus urged by the great Indra, Matanga said
the following words:

"Matanga said, 'Let me be possessed of the power of assuming any form at
will, and journeying through the skies and let me enjoy whatever
pleasures I may set my heart upon. And let me also have the willing
adorations of both Brahmanas and Kshatriyas. I bow to thee by bending my
head, O god. It behoveth thee to do that also by which my fame, O
Purandara, May live for ever in the world.'

"Sakra said, 'Thou shalt be celebrated as the deity of a particular
measure of verse and thou shalt obtain the worship of all woman. Thy
fame, O son, shall become unrivalled in the three worlds.'--Having
granted him these boons, Vasava disappeared there and then. Matanga also,
casting off his life-breaths, attained to a high place. Thou mayst thus
see, O Bharata, that the status of a Brahmana is very high. That status
is incapable of being acquired here (except in the natural way of birth)
as said by the great Indra himself.'



SECTION XXX

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard this great narrative, O perpetuator of
Kuru's race. Thou, O foremost of eloquent men, hast said that the status
of a Brahmana is exceedingly difficult of acquisition. It is heard,
however, that in former times the status of a Brahmana had been acquired
by Viswamitra. Thou, however, O best of men, tellest us that status is
incapable of being acquired. I have also heard that king Vitahavya in
ancient times succeeded in obtaining the status of a Brahmana. I desire
to hear, O puissant son of Ganga, the story of Vitahavya's promotion. By
what acts did that best of kings succeed in acquiring the status of a
Brahmana? Was it through some boon (obtained from some one of great
puissance) or was it through the virtue of penances? It behoveth thee to
tell me everything.'

"Bhishma said, 'Hear, O monarch, how the royal sage Vitahavya of great
celebrity succeeded in ancient times in acquiring the status of a
Brahmana that is so difficult to attain and that is held in such high
reverence by all the world. While the high-souled Manu in days of yore
was employed in righteously ruling his subjects, he obtained a son of
righteous soul who became celebrated under the name of Saryati. In
Saryati's, race, O monarch, two kings took their birth, viz., Haihaya and
Talajangha. Both of them were sons of Vatsa, O foremost of victorious
kings. Haihaya, O monarch, had ten wives. Upon them he begot, O Bharata,
a century of sons all of whom were highly inclined to fighting. All of
them resembled one another in features and prowess. All of them were
endued with great strength and all of them were possessed of great skill
in battle. They all studied the Vedas and the science of weapons
thoroughly. In Kasi also, O monarch, there was a king who was the
grandfather of Divodasa. The foremost of victorious men, he was known by
the name of Haryyaswa. The sons of king Haihaya, O chief of men (who was
otherwise known by the name of Vitahavya), invaded the kingdom of Kasi
and advancing to the country that lies between the rivers Ganga and
Yamuna, fought a battle with king Haryyaswa and also slew him in it.
Having slain king Haryyaswa in this way, the sons of Haihaya, those great
car-warriors, fearlessly went back to their own delightful city in the
country of the Vatsas. Meanwhile Haryyaswa's son Sudeva, who looked like
a deity in splendour and who was a second god of righteousness, was
installed on the throne of Kasi as its ruler. The delighter of Kasi, that
righteous-souled prince ruled his kingdom for sometime, when the hundred
sons of Vitahavya once more invaded his dominions and defeated him in
battle. Having vanquished king Sudeva thus, the victors returned to their
own city. After that Divodasa, the son of Sudeva, became installed on the
throne of Kasi as its ruler. Realising the prowess of those high-souled
princes, viz., the sons of Vitahavya, king Divodasa, endued with great
energy, rebuilt and fortified the city of Baranasi at the command of
Indra. The territories of Divodasa were full of Brahmanas and Kshatriyas,
and abounded with Vaisyas and Sudras. And they teemed with articles and
provisions of every kind, and were adorned with shops and marts swelling
with prosperity. Those territories, O best of kings, stretched northwards
from the banks of Ganga to the southern banks of Gomati, and resembled a
second Amravati (the city of Indra). The Haihayas once again, O Bharata,
attacked that tiger among kings, as he ruled his kingdom. The mighty king
Divodasa endued with great splendour, issuing out of his capital, gave
them battle. The engagement between the two parties proved so fierce as
to resemble the encounter in days of old between the deities and the
Asuras. King Divodasa fought the enemy for a thousand days at the end of
which, having lost a number of followers and animals, he became
exceedingly distressed.[250] King Divodasa, O monarch, having lost his
army and seeing his treasury exhausted, left his capital and fled away.
Repairing to the delightful retreat of Bhardwaja endued with great wisdom
the king, O chastiser of foes joining his hands in reverence, sought the
Rishi's protection. Beholding King Divodasa before him, the eldest son of
Vrihaspati, viz., Bharadwaja of excellent conduct, who was the monarch's
priest, said unto him, What is the reason of thy coming here? Tell me
everything, O king. I shall do that which is agreeable to thee, without
any scruple.'

"The king said, 'O holy one, the sons of Vitahavya have slain all the
children and men of my house. I only have escaped with life, totally
discomfited by the foe. I seek thy protection. It behoveth thee, O holy
one, to protect me with such affection as thou hast for a disciple. Those
princes of sinful deeds have slaughtered my whole race, leaving myself
only alive.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Unto him who pleaded so piteously, Bharadwaja of
great energy said, Do not fear! Do not fear! O son of Sudeva, let thy
fears be dispelled. I shall perform a sacrifice, O monarch, in order that
thou mayst have a son through whom thou shalt be able to smite thousands
upon thousands of Vitahavya's party. After this, the Rishi performed a
sacrifice with the object of bestowing a son on Divodasa. As the result
thereof, unto Divodasa was born a son named Pratarddana. Immediately on
his birth he grew up like a boy of full three and ten years and quickly
mastered the entire Vedas and the whole of arms. Aided by his Yoga
powers, Bharadwaja of great intelligence had entered into the prince.
Indeed, collecting all the energy that occurs in the object of the
universe, Bharadwaja put them together in the body of prince Pratarddana.
Put on shining mail on his person and armed with the bow, Pratarddana,
his praises sung by bards and the celestial Rishis, shone resplendent
like the risen star of day. Mounted on his car and with the scimitar tied
to his belt, he shone like a blazing fire. With scimitar and shield and
whirling his shield as he went, he proceeded to the presence of his sire.
Beholding the prince, the son of Sudeva, viz., king Divodasa, became
filled with joy. Indeed, the old king thought the sons of his enemy
Vitahavya as already slain. Divodasa then installed his son Pratarddana
as Yuvaraja, and regarding himself crowned with success became
exceedingly happy. After this, the old king commanded that chastiser of
foes, viz., prince Pratarddana to march against the sons of Vitahavya and
slay them in battle. Endued with great powers. Pratarddana, that
subjugator of hostile cities speedily crossed Ganga on his car and
proceeded against the city of the Vitahavyas. Hearing the clatter
produced by the wheels of his car, the sons of Vitahavya, riding on their
own cars that looked like fortified citadels and that were capable of
destroying hostile vehicles, issued out of their city. Issuing out of
their capital, those tigers among men, viz., the sons of Vitahavya, who
were all skilful warriors cased in mail, rushed with uplifted weapons
towards Pratarddana, covering him with showers of arrows. Encompassing
him with innumerable cars, O Yudhisthira, the Vitahavyas poured upon
Pratarddana showers of weapons of various kinds like clouds pouring
torrents of rain on the breast of Himavat. Baffling their weapons with
his own, prince Pratarddana endued with mighty energy slew them all with
his shafts that resembled the lighting fire of Indra. Their heads struck
off, O king, with hundreds and thousands of broad-headed arrows, the
warriors of Vitahavya fell down with blood-dyed bodies like Kinsuka trees
felled by woodmen with their axes on every side. After all his warriors
and sons had fallen in battle, king Vitahavya fled away from his capital
to the retreat of Bhrigu. Indeed, arrived there, the royal fugitive
sought the protection of Bhrigu. The Rishi Bhrigu, O monarch, assured the
defeated king of his protection. Pratarddana followed in the footsteps of
Vitahavya. Arrived at the Rishi's retreat, the son of Divodasa said in a
loud voice.--Ho, listen ye disciples of the high souled Bhrigu that may
happen to be present, I wish to see the sage. Go and inform him of this.
Recognising that it was Pratarddana who had come, the Rishi Bhrigu
himself came out of his retreat and worshipped that best of kings
according to due rites. Addressing him then, the Rishi said,--Tell me, O
king, what is thy business. The king, at this, informed the Rishi of the
reason of his presence.'

"The king said, 'King Vitahavya has come here, O Brahmana. Do thou give
him up. His sons, O Brahmana, had destroyed my race. They had laid waste
the territories and the wealth of the kingdom of Kasi. Hundred sons,
however, of this king proud of his might, have all been slain by me. By
slaying that king himself I shall today pay off the debt I owe to my
father. Unto him that foremost of righteous men, viz., the Rishi Bhrigu,
penetrated with compassion, replied by saying,--There is no Kshatriya in
this retreat. They that are here are all Brahmanas. Hearing these words
of Bhrigu that must accord he thought with truth, Pratarddana touched the
Rishi's feet slowly and, filled with delight, said,--By this, O holy one,
I am without doubt, crowned with success, since this king becomes
abandoned by the very order of his birth in consequence of my prowess.
Give me thy permission, O Brahmana, to leave thee, and let me solicit
thee to pray for my welfare. This king, O founder of the race that goes
by the name, has been compelled to leave of the very community of his
birth, in consequence of my might. Dismissed by the Rishi Bhrigu, king
Pratarddana then departed from that retreat, having even as a snake
vomits forth its real poison and repaired to the place he had come from.
Meanwhile, king Vitahavya attained to the status of a Brahmana sage by
virtue of the words only of Bhrigu. And he acquired also a complete
mastery over all the Vedas through the same cause. Vitahavya had a son
named Gritsamada who in beauty of person was a second Indra. Once on a
time the Daityas afflicted him much, believing him to be none else than
Indra. With regard to that high-souled Rishi, one foremost of Srutis in
the Richs goes like this viz., He with whom Gritsamada stays, O Brahmana,
is held in high respect by all Brahmanas. Endued with great intelligence,
Gritsamada become a regenerate Rishi in the observance of Brahmacharyya.
Gritsamada had a regenerate son of the name of Sutejas. Sutejas had a son
of the name of Varchas, and the son of Varchas was known by the name of
Vihavya. Vihavya had a son of his loins who was named Vitatya and Vitatya
had a son of name Satya. Satya had a son of name Santa. Santa had a son,
viz., the Rishi Sravas. Sravas begot a son named Tama. Tama begot a son
named Prakasa, who was a very superior Brahmana. Prakasa had a son named
Vagindra who was the foremost of all silent reciters of sacred Mantras.
Vagindra begot a son named Pramati who was a complete master of all the
Vedas and their branches. Pramati begot upon the Apsara Ghritachi a son
who was named Ruru. Ruru begot a son upon his spouse Pramadvara. That son
was the regenerate Rishi Sunaka. Sunaka begot a son who is named Saunaka.
It was even thus, O foremost of monarchs, that king Vitahavya, though a
Kshatriya by the order of his birth, obtained the status of a Brahmana, O
chief of Kshatriyas, through the grace of Bhrigu. I have also told thee
the genealogy of the race that sprung from Gritsamada. What else wouldst
thou ask?'



SECTION XXXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'What men, O chief of Bharata's race, are worthy of
reverent homage in the three worlds? Tell me this in detail verily. I am
never satiated with hearing thee discourse on these topics.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse between Narada and Vasudeva. Beholding Narada on one occasion
worshipping many foremost of Brahmanas with joined hands, Kesava
addressed him saying, Whom dost thou worship? Whom amongst these
Brahmanas, O holy one dost thou worship with so great reverence? If it is
a matter that I can heard of, I then wish to hear it. Do, O foremost of
righteous men, tell me this!'[251]

"Narada said, 'Hear, O Govinda, as to who those are whom I am
worshipping, O grinder of foes. Who else is there in this world that so
much deserves to hear this? I worship the Brahmanas, O puissant one, who
constantly worship Varuna and Vayu and Aditya and Parjanya and the deity
of Fire, and Sthanu and Skanda and Lakshmi and Vishnu and the Brahmanas,
and the lord of speech, and Chandramas, and the Waters and Earth and the
goddess Saraswati. O tiger of Vrishni's race, I always worship those
Brahmanas that are endued with penances, that are conversant with the
Vedas, that are always devoted to Vedic study, and that are possessed of
high worth. O puissant one, I bow down my head unto those persons who are
freed from boastfulness, who discharge, with an empty stomach, the rites
in honour of the deities, who are always contented with what they have
and who are endued with forgiveness. I worship them, O Yadava, that are
performers of sacrifices, that are of a forgiving disposition, and self
restrained, that are masters of their own senses, that worship truth and
righteousness, and that give away land and kine unto good Brahmanas.[252]
I bow unto them, O Yadava, that are devoted to the observance of
penances, that dwell in forests, that subsist upon fruits and roots, that
never store anything for the morrow, and that are observant of all the
acts and rites laid down in the scriptures. I bow unto them, O Yadava,
that feed and cherish their servants, that are always hospitable to
guests, and that eat only the remnants of what is offered to the deities.
I worship them that have become irresistible by studying the Vedas, that
are eloquent in discoursing on the scriptures, that are observant of the
vow of Brahmacharyya, and that are always devoted to the duties of
officiating at the sacrifices of others and of teaching disciples. I
worship them that are endued with compassion towards all creatures, and
that study the Vedas till noon (i.e. till their backs are heated by the
sun). I bow unto them, O Yadava, that strive to obtain the grace of their
preceptors, that labour in the acquisition of their Vedas, that are firm
in the observance of vows, that wait, with dutiful obedience, upon their
preceptors and seniors, and that are free from malice and envy. I bow
unto them, O Yadava, that are observant of excellent vows, that practice
taciturnity, that have knowledge of Brahman, that are firm in truth, that
are givers of libations of clarified butter and oblations of meat. I bow
to them, O Yadava, that subsist upon eleemosynary alms, that are
emaciated for want of adequate food and drink, that have lived in the
abodes of their preceptors, that are averse to and destitute of all
enjoyments, and that are poor in the goods of this Earth. I bow unto
them, O Yadava, that have no affection for things of this Earth, that
have no quarrels to wage with others, that do not clothe themselves, that
have no wants, that have become irresistible through the acquisition of
the Vedas, that are eloquent in the exposition of righteousness, and that
are utterers of Brahma, I bow unto them that are devoted to the practice
of the duty of compassion towards all creatures, that are firm in the
observance of truth, that are self-restrained, and that are peaceful in
their behaviour. I bow unto them, O Yadava, that are devoted to the
worship of deities and guests, that are observant of the domestic mode of
life, and that follow the practice of pigeons in the matter of their
subsistence.[253] I always bow unto those persons whose aggregate of
three exists, without being weakened, in all their acts, and who are
observant of truth and righteous behaviour,[254] I bow unto them, O
Kesava, that are conversant with Brahma, that are endued with knowledge
of the Vedas, that are attentive to the aggregate of three, that are free
from cupidity, and that are righteous in their behaviour. I bow unto
them, O Madhava, that subsist upon water only, or upon air alone, or upon
the remnants of the food that is offered to deities and guests, and that
are observant of diverse kinds of excellent vows. I always worship them
that have no spouses (in consequence of the vow of celibacy they
observe), that have spouses and the domestic fire (in consequence of the
domestic mode of life they lead), that are the refuge of the Vedas, and
that are the refuge of all creatures in the universe (in consequence of
the compassion they feel towards them). I always bow unto those Rishis, O
Krishna, that are the creators of the universe, that are the elders of
the universe, that are the eldest members of the race or the family, that
are dispellers of the darkness of ignorance, and that are the best of all
persons in the universe (for righteousness of behaviour and knowledge of
the scriptures). For these reasons, do thou also, O scion of Vrishni's
race, worship every day those regenerate persons of whom I speak.
Deserving as they are of reverent worship, they will when worshipped,
confer happiness on thee, O sinless one. Those persons of whom I speak
are always givers of happiness in this world as well as in the next.
Reverenced by all, they move about in this world, and if worshipped by
thee are sure to grant thee happiness. They who are hospitable to all
persons that come unto them as guests, and who are always devoted to
Brahmanas and kine, as also to truth (in speech and behaviour), succeed
in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who are always devoted to
peacefulness of behaviour, as also they who are freed from malice and
envy, and they who are always attentive to the study of the Vedas,
succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who bow unto all
the deities (without showing a preference for any and thereby proving
their tolerance), they who betake themselves to one Veda as their refuge,
they who are possessed of faith and are self-restrained, succeed in
crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who worship the foremost of
Brahmanas with reverence and are firm in the observance of excellent vows
and practise the virtue of charity, succeed in crossing all calamities
and obstacles. They who are engaged in the practice of penances, they who
are always observant of the vow of celibacy, and they whose souls have
been cleansed by penances, succeed in crossing all calamities and
obstacles. They who are devoted to the worship of the deities and guests
and dependants, as also of the Pitris, and they who eat the remnant of
the food that is offered to deities, Pitris, guests and dependants,
succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They who, having
ignited the domestic fire, duly keep it burning and worship it with
reverence and they who have duly poured libations (to the deities) in
Soma-sacrifices, succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles. They
who behave as they should towards their mothers and fathers and
preceptors and other seniors even as thou, O tiger among the Vrishnis,
dost behave, succeed in crossing all calamities and obstacles--Having
said these words, the celestial Rishi ceased speaking.'

"Bhishma continued. 'For these reasons, do thou also, O son of Kunti,
always worship with reverence the deities, the Pitris, the Brahmanas, and
guests arrived at thy mansion and as the consequence of such conduct thou
art sure to attain to a desirable end!'"



SECTION XXXII

"Yudhishthira said,--'O grandsire, O thou of great wisdom, O thou that
art conversant with all branches of knowledge, I desire to hear thee
discourse on topics connected with duty and Righteousness. Tell me truly,
O chief of Bharata's race, what the merits are of those persons that
grant protection to living creatures of the four orders when these pray
for protection.'

"Bhishma said, 'O Dharma's son of great wisdom and widespread fame,
listen to this old history touching the great merit of granting
protection to others when protection is humbly sought. Once on a time, a
beautiful pigeon, pursued by a hawk, dropped down from the skies and
sought the protection of the highly-blessed king Vrishadarbha. The
pure-souled monarch, beholding the pigeon take refuge in his lap from
fear, comforted him, saying, Be comforted, O bird; do not fear, Whence
hast thou taken such great fright? What hast thou done and where hast
thou done it in consequence of which thou hast lost thy senses in fear
and art more dead than alive? Thy colour, beautiful bird, is such as to
resemble that which adorns a fresh-blown lotus of the blue variety. Thy
eyes are of the hue of the pomegranate or the Asoka flower. Do not fear.
I bid thee, be comforted. When thou hast sought refuge with me, know that
no one will have the courage to even think of seizing thee,--thee that
hast such a protector to take care of thy person. I shall for thy sake,
give up today the very kingdom of the Kasi and, if need be, my lice too.
Be comforted, therefore, and let no fear be thine, O pigeon.'

"The hawk said, 'This bird has been ordained to be my food. It behoves
thee not, O king, to protect him from me. I have outcoursed this bird and
have got him. Verily, with great effort have I got at him at last. His
flesh and blood and marrow and fat will be of great good to me. This bird
will be the means of gratifying me greatly. Do not, O king, place thyself
between him and me in this way. Fierce is the thirst that is afflicting
me, and hunger is gnawing my bowels. Release the bird and cast him off. I
am unable to bear the pains of hunger any longer. I pursued him as my
prey. Behold, his body is bruised and torn by me with my wings and
talons. Look, his breath has become very weak. It behoves thee not, O
king, to protect him from me. In the exercise of that power which
properly belongs to thee, thou art, indeed competent to interfere in
protecting human beings when they are sought to be destroyed by human
beings. Thou canst not, however, be admitted to have any power over a
sky-ranging bird afflicted with thirst. Thy power may extend over thy
enemies, thy servants, thy relatives, the disputes that take place
between thy subjects. Indeed, it may extend over every part of thy
dominions and over also thy own senses. Thy power, however, does not
extend over the welkin. Displaying thy prowess over such foes as act
against thy wishes, thou mayst establish thy rule over them. Thy rule,
however, does not extend over the birds that range the sky. Indeed, if
thou hast been desirous of earning merit (by protecting this pigeon), it
is thy duty to look at me also (and do what is proper for enabling me to
appease my hunger and save my life)!

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the hawk, the royal sage
became filled with wonder. Without disregarding these words of his, the
king, desirous of attending to his comforts, replied unto him saying the
following words.'

"The king said, 'Let a bovine bull or boar or deer or buffalo be dressed
today for thy sake. Do thou appease thy hunger on such food today. Never
to desert one that has sought my protection in my firm vow. Behold, O
bird, this bird does not leave my lap!'

"The hawk said, 'I do not, O monarch, eat the flesh of the boar or the ox
or of any of the diverse kinds of fowl. What need have I of food of this
or that kind? My concern is with that food which has been eternally
ordained for beings of my order? Hawks feed on pigeons,--this is the
eternal ordinance. O sinless, Usinara, if thou feelest such affection for
this pigeon, do thou then give me flesh from thy own body, of weight
equal to that of this pigeon.'

"The king said, 'Great is the favour thou showiest me today by speaking
to me in this strain. Yes, I shall do what thou biddest. Having said
this, that best of monarchs began to cut off his own flesh and weigh it
in a balance against the pigeon. Meanwhile, in the inner apartments of
the palace, the spouses of king, adorned with jewels and gems, hearing
what was taking place, uttered exclamations of woe and came out, stricken
with grief. In consequence of those cries of the ladies, as also of the
ministers and servants, a noise deep as the roar of the clouds arose in
the palace. The sky that had been very clear became enveloped with thick
clouds on every side. The Earth began to tremble, as the consequence of
that act of truth which the monarch did. The king began to cut off the
flesh from his flanks from the arms, and from his thighs, and quickly
fill one of the scales for weighing it against the pigeon. In spite of
all that, the pigeon continued to weigh heavier. When at last the king
became a skeleton of bones, without any flesh, and covered with blood, he
desired to give up his whole body and, therefore, ascended the scale in
which he had placed the flesh that he had previously cut off. At that
time, the three worlds, with Indra at their head, came to that spot for
beholding him. Celestial kettle-drums and diverse drums were struck and
played upon by invisible beings belonging to the firmament. King
Vrishadarbha was bathed in a shower of nectar that was poured upon him.
Garlands of celestial flowers, of delicious fragrance and touch, were
also showered upon him copiously and repeatedly. The deities and
Gandharvas and Apsaras in large bands began to sing and dance around him
even as they sing and dance around the Grandsire Brahma. The king then
ascended a celestial car that surpassed (in grandeur and beauty) a
mansion made entirely of gold, that had arches made of gold and gems, and
that was adorned with columns made of lapis lazuli. Through the merit of
his act, the royal sage Sivi proceeded to eternal Heaven. Do thou also, O
Yudhishthira, act in the same way towards those that seek thy protection.
He who protects those that are devoted to him, those that are attached to
him from love and affection, and those that depend upon him, and who has
compassion for all creatures, succeeds in attaining to great felicity
hereafter. That king who is of righteous behaviour and who is observant
of honesty and integrity, succeeds by his acts of sincerity in acquiring
every valuable reward. The royal sage Sivi of pure soul and endued with
great wisdom and unbaffled prowess, that ruler of the kingdom of Kasi,
became celebrated over the three worlds for his deeds of righteousness.
Anybody who would protect in the same way a seeker for protection, would
certainly attain (like Sivi himself) to the same happy end, O best of the
Bharatas. He who recites this history of the royal sage Vrishadarbha is
sure to become cleansed of every sin, and the person who hears this
history recited by another is sure to attain to the same result.'"



SECTION XXXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Which act, O grandsire, is the foremost of all those
that have been laid down for a king? What is that act by doing which a
king succeeds in enjoying both this world and the next?'

"Bhishma said, 'Even this viz., the worship of the Brahmanas, is the
foremost of all those act, O Bharata, which have been laid down for a
king duly installed on the throne, if, indeed, he is desirous of
obtaining great happiness. Even this is what the foremost of all kings
should do. Know this well, O chief of Bharata's race. The king should
always worship with reverence all righteous Brahmanas possessed of Vedic
lore.[255] The king should, with bows and comforting speeches and gifts
of all articles of enjoyment, worship all Brahmanas possessed of great
learning who may dwell in his city or provinces. This is the foremost of
all acts laid down for the king. Indeed, the king should always keep his
eyes fixed on this. He should protect and cherish these, even as he
protects his own self or his own children. The king should worship with
greater reverence those amongst the Brahmanas that may be worthy of it
(for their superior sanctity and learning). When such men are freed from
all anxiety, the whole kingdom blazes forth in beauty. Such individuals
are worthy of adoration. Unto such the king should bow his head. Verily,
they should be honoured, even as one honours one's sires and grandsires.
Upon them depends the course of conduct followed by men, even as the
existence of all creatures depends upon Vasava. Of prowess incapable of
being baffled and endued with great energy, such men, if enraged, are
capable of consuming the entire kingdom to ashes by only fiat of their
will, or by acts of incantation, or by other means (derived from the
power of penance). I do not see anything that can destroy them. Their
power seems to be uncontrolled, being capable of reaching to the farthest
end of the universe. When angry, their glances fall upon men and things
like a blazing flame of fire upon a forest. The most courageous men are
struck with fear at their men. Their virtues and powers are extraordinary
and immeasurable. Some amongst them are like wells and pits with mouths
covered by grass and creepers, while others resemble the firmament
cleared of clouds and darkness. Some amongst them are of fierce
dispositions (like Durvasas and others of that stamp). Some are as mild
and soft in disposition as cotton (like Gautama and others). Some amongst
them are very cunning (like Agastya who devoured the Asura Vatapi, and
Rishis of that class). Some amongst them are devoted to the practice of
penances. Some amongst them are employed in agricultural pursuits (like
the preceptor of Uddalaka). Some amongst them are engaged in the keep of
kine (as Upamanyu while attending his preceptor). Some amongst them live
upon eleemosynary alms. Some amongst them are even thieves (like Valmiki
in his early years and Viswamitra during a famine). Some amongst them are
fond of fomenting quarrels and disputes (like Narada). Some, again,
amongst them are actors and dancers (like Bharata). Some amongst them are
competent to achieve all feats, ordinary and extraordinary (like Agastya
drinking up the entire ocean, as if it were a palmful of water). The
Brahmanas, O chief of Bharata's race are of diverse aspects and
behaviour. One should always utter the praises of the Brahmanas who are
conversant with all duties, who are righteous of behaviour, who are
devoted to diverse kinds of act, and who are seen to derive their
sustenance from diverse kinds of occupations.[256] The Brahmanas, O ruler
of men, who are highly blessed, are elder in respect of their origin than
the Pitris, the deities, human beings (belonging to the three other
orders), the Snakes and the Rakshasas. These regenerate persons are
incapable of being vanquished by the deities or the Pitris, or the
Gandharvas or the Rakshasas, or the Asuras or the Pisachas. The Brahmanas
are competent to make him a deity that is not a deity They can, again,
divest one that is a deity of his status as such. He becomes a king whom
they wish to make a king. He, on the other hand, goes to the wall whom
they do not love or like. I tell thee truly, O king, that those foolish
persons, without doubt, meet with destruction who calumniate the
Brahmanas and utter their dispraise. Skilled in praise and dispraise, and
themselves the origin or cause of other people's fame and ignominy the
Brahmanas, O king, always become angry with those that seek to injure
others. That man whom the Brahmanas praise succeeds in growing in
prosperity. That man who is censured and is cast off by the Brahmanas
soon meets with discomfiture. It is in consequence of the absence of
Brahmanas from among them that the Sakas, the Yavanas, the Kamvojas and
other Kshatriya tribes have become fallen and degraded into the status of
Sudras. The Dravidas, the Kalingas, the Pulandas, the Usinaras, the
Kolisarpas, the Mahishakas and other Kshatriyas, have, in consequence of
the absence of Brahmanas from among their midst, become degraded into
Sudras. Defeat at their hands is preferable to victory over them, O
foremost of victorious persons. One slaying all other living creatures in
the world does not incur a sin so heinous as that of slaying a single
Brahmana. The great Rishis have said that Brahmanicide is a heinous sin.
One should never utter the dispraise or calumny of the Brahmanas. Where
the dispraise of Brahmanas is uttered, one should sit with face hanging
down or leave that spot (for avoiding both the utterer and his words).
That man has not as yet been born in this world or will not take birth
here, who has been or will be able to pass his life in happiness after
quarrelling with the Brahmanas. One cannot seize the wind with one's
hands. One cannot touch the moon with one's hand. One cannot support the
Earth on one's arms. After the same manner, O king, one is not able to
vanquish the Brahmanas in this world.'"



SECTION XXXIV

"Bhishma said, 'One should always offer the most reverent worship unto
the Brahmanas. They have Soma for their king, and they it is who confer
happiness and misery upon others. They, O king, should always be
cherished and protected as one cherishes and protects one's own sires and
grandsires, and should be adored with bows and gifts of food and
ornaments and other articles of enjoyment, as also with such things as
they may desire. The peace and happiness of the kingdom flow from such
respect shown to the Brahmanas even as the peace and happiness of all
living creatures flow from Vasava, the chief of the celestials. Let
Brahmanas of pure behaviour and Brahma-effulgence be born in a kingdom.
Kshatriyas also that are splendid car-warriors and that are capable of
scorching all foes, should be desired (amongst those that settle in a
kingdom). This was said unto me by Narada. There is nothing higher, O
king, than this, viz., the act of causing a Brahmana possessed of good
birth, having a knowledge of morality and righteousness, and steadfast in
the observance of excellent vows, to take up his residence in one's
mansion. Such an act is productive of every kind of blessing. The
sacrificial offerings given unto Brahmanas reach the very deities who
accept them. Brahmanas are the sires of all creatures. There is nothing
higher than a Brahmana. Aditya, Chandramas, Wind, Water, Earth, Sky and
the points of the compass, all enter the body of the Brahmana and take
what the Brahmana eats.[257] In that house where Brahmanas do not eat,
the Pitris refuse to eat. The deities also never eat in the house of the
wretch who hates the Brahmanas. When the Brahmanas are gratified, the
Pitris also are gratified. There is no doubt in this. They that give away
the sacrificial butter unto the Brahmanas become themselves gratified (in
this and the other world). Such men never meet with destruction. Verily,
they succeed in attaining to high ends. Those particular offerings in
sacrifices with which one gratifies the Brahmanas go to gratify both the
Pitris and the deities. The Brahmana is the cause of that sacrifice
whence all created things have sprung. The Brahmana is acquainted with
that from which this universe has sprung and unto which, when apparently
destroyed, it returns. Indeed the Brahmana knows the path that leads to
Heaven and the other path that leads to the opposite place. The Brahmana
is conversant with what has happened and what will happen. The Brahmana
is the foremost of all two-legged beings. The Brahmana, O chief of the
Bharatas, is fully conversant with the duties that have been laid down
for his order. Those persons that follow the Brahmanas are never
vanquished. Departing from this world, they never meet with destruction.
Indeed victory is always theirs. Those high-souled persons,--indeed,
those persons that have subdued their souls,--who accept the words that
fall from the lips of the Brahmanas, are never vanquished. Victory always
becomes theirs.[258] The energy and might of those Kshatriyas who scorch
everything with their energy and might become neutralised when they
encounter the Brahmanas. The Bhrigus conquered the Talajanghas. The son
of Angiras conquered the Nipas. Bharadwaja conquered the Vitahavyas as
also the Ailas. O chief of Bharata's race. Although all these Kshatriyas
were capable of using diverse kinds of arms, yet the Brahmanas named,
owning only black deer skins for their emblems, succeeded in conquering
them effectually. Bestowing the Earth upon the Brahmanas and illuminating
both the worlds by the splendour of such a deed, one should accomplish
acts through which one may succeed in attaining to the end of all
things.[259] Like fire concealed within wood, everything that is said or
heard or read in this world, lies ensconced in the Brahmana. In this
connection is cited the old history of the conversation between Vasudeva
and the Earth, O chief of Bharata's race!'

"Vasudeva said, 'O mother of all creatures, O auspicious goddess, I
desire to ask thee for a solution of this doubt of mine. By what act does
a man leading the domestic mode of life succeed in cleansing all his
sins?'

"The Earth said, 'One should serve the Brahmanas. This conduct is
cleansing and excellent. All the impurities destroyed of that man who
serves the Brahmanas with reverence. From this (conduct) arises
prosperity. From this arises fame. From this springs forth intelligence
or knowledge of the soul. A Kshatriya by this conduct, becomes a mighty
car-warrior and a scorcher of foes and succeeds in acquiring great fame.
Even this is what Narada said unto me, viz., that one should always
revere a Brahmana that is well-born, of rigid vows and conversant with
the scriptures, if one desires every kind of prosperity. That man really
grows in prosperity who is applauded by the Brahmanas, who are higher
than those that are regarded superior to all men high or low. That man
who speaks ill of the Brahmanas soon meets with discomfiture, even as a
clod of unbaked earth meets with destruction when cast into the sea.
After the same manner, all acts that are hurtful to the Brahmanas are
sure to bring about discomfiture and ruin. Behold the dark spots on the
Moon and the salt waters of the ocean. The great Indra had at one time
been marked all over with a thousand sex-marks. It was through the power
of the Brahmanas that those marks became altered into as so many eyes.
Behold, O Mahadeva how all those things took place. Desiring fame and
prosperity and diverse regions of beautitude in the next world, a person
of pure behaviour and soul should, O slayer of Madhu, live in obedience
to the dictates of the Brahmanas.'[260]

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the goddess Earth, the slayer
of Madhu, O thou of Kuru's race, exclaimed,--Excellent, Excellent--and
honoured the goddess in due form. Having heard this discourse between the
goddess Earth and Madhava, do thou, O son of Pritha, always, with rapt
soul, worship all superior Brahmanas. Doing this, thou shalt verily
obtain what is highly beneficial for thee!"'



SECTION XXXV

"Bhishma said, 'O blessed king, Brahmana, by birth alone, becomes an
object of adoration with all creatures and are entitled, as guests, to
eat the first portion of all cooked food.[261] From them flow all the
great objects of life (viz., Righteousness and Wealth and Pleasure and
Emancipation). They are the friends of all creatures in the universe.
They are again the mouths of the deities (for food poured into their
mouths is eaten by the deities). Worshipped with reverence, they wish us
prosperity by uttering words fraught with auspiciousness. Disregarded by
our foes, let them be enraged with these, and let them wish evil unto
those detractors of theirs, uttering words fraught with severe curses. In
this connection, persons conversant with ancient history repeat the
following verses sung of old respecting how in ancient times the Creator,
after having created the Brahmanas, ordained their duties.--A Brahmana
should never do anything else than what has been ordained for him.
Protected, they should protect others. By conducting themselves in this
way, they are sure to attain to what is mightily advantageous for them.
By doing those acts that are ordained for them, they are sure to obtain
Brahma-prosperity. Ye shall become the exemplars of all creatures, and
reins for restraining them. A Brahmana possessed of learning should never
do that which is laid down for the Sudras. By doing such acts, a Brahmana
loses merit[262]. By Vedic study he is sure to obtain prosperity and
intelligence and energy and puissance competent to scorch all things, as
also glory of the most exalted kind. By offering oblations of clarified
butter unto the deities, the Brahmanas attain to high blessedness and
become worthy of taking the precedence of even children in the matter of
all kinds of cooked food, and endued with Brahma-prosperity.[263] Endued
with faith that is fraught with compassion towards all creatures, and
devoted to self-restraint and the study of the Vedas, ye shall attain to
the fruition of all your wishes. Whatever things exist in the world of
men, whatever things occur in the region of the deities, can all be
achieved acquired with the aid of penances and knowledge and the
observance of vows and restraints. I have thus recited to thee, O sinless
one, the verses that were sung by Brahma himself. Endued with supreme
intelligence and wisdom, the Creator himself ordained this, through
compassion for the Brahmanas. The puissance of those among them that are
devoted to penances is equal to the might of kings. They are verily
irresistible, fierce, possessed of the speed of lightning, and
exceedingly quick in what they do. There are amongst them those that are
possessed of the might of lions and those that are possessed of the might
of tigers. Some of them are endued with the might of boars, some with
that of the deer, and some with that of crocodiles. Some there are
amongst them whose touch resembles that of snakes of virulent poison, and
some whose bite resembles that of sharks. Some amongst them are capable
of compassing by speech alone the destruction of those that are opposed
to them; and some are competent to destroy by a glance only of their
eyes. Some, amongst them, as already said, are like snakes of virulent
poison, and some of them are possessed of very mild dispositions. The
dispositions, O Yudhisthira, of the Brahmanas, are of diverse kinds. The
Mekalas, the Dravidas, the Lathas, the Paundras, the Konwasiras, the
Saundikas, the Daradas, the Darvas, the Chauras, the Savaras, the
Varvaras, the Kiratas, the Yavanas, and numerous other tribes of
Kshatriyas, have become degraded into the status of Sudras through the
wrath of Brahmanas. In consequence of having disregarded the Brahmanas,
the Asuras have been obliged to take refuge in the depths of the ocean.
Through the grace of the Brahmanas, the deities have become denizens of
the happy regions of Heaven. The element of space or ether is incapable
of being touched. The Himavat mountains are incapable of being moved from
their site. The current of Ganga is incapable of being resisted by a dam.
The Brahmanas are incapable of being subjugated. Kshatriyas are incapable
of ruling the Earth without cultivating the good will of the Brahmanas.
The Brahmanas are high-souled beings. They are the deities of the very
deities. Do thou always worship them with gifts and obedient services:
if, indeed, thou wishest to enjoy the sovereignty of the whole Earth with
her belt of seas. The energy and might of Brahmanas, O sinless one,
become abated in consequence of the acceptance of gift. Thou shouldst
protect thy race. O king, from those Brahmanas that do not desire to
accept gifts!'"[264]



(Anusasana Parva Continued in Volume XI)









 SECTION XXXVI

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old history of the
discourse between Sakra and Samvara. Do thou listen to it, O
Yudhishthira. Once upon a time Sakra, assuming the guise of an ascetic
with matted locks on his head and body smeared with ashes all over, rode
on an ugly car and repaired to the presence of the Asura Samvara.'

"Sakra said, 'Through what conduct, O Samvara, hast thou been able to get
at the head of all individuals of thy race? For what reason do all people
regard thee as superior? Do thou tell me this truly and in detail.'

"Samvara said, 'I never cherish any ill-feelings towards the Brahmanas.
Whatever instructions they impart I accept with unquestioning reverence.
When the Brahmanas are engaged in interpreting the scriptures, I listen
to them with great happiness. Having heard their interpretations I never
disregard them. Nor do I ever offend against the Brahmanas in any way. I
always worship those Brahmanas that are endued with intelligence. I
always seek information from them. I always worship their feet.
Approaching me with confidence, they always address me with affection and
enquire after my welfare. If they ever happen to be heedless, I am always
heedful. If they happen to sleep, I always remain wakeful. Like bees
drenching the cells of the comb with honey, the Brahmanas, who are my
instructors and rulers, always drench me with the nectar of knowledge--me
that am always devoted to the path pointed out by the scriptures, that am
devoted to the Brahmanas, and that am perfectly free from malice or evil
passion. Whatever they say with cheerful hearts, I always accept aided by
memory and understanding. I am always careful of my own faith in them and
I always think of my own inferiority to them. I always lick the nectar
that dwells at the end of their tongue, and it is for this reason that I
occupy a position far above that of all others of my race like the Moon
transcending all the stars. The scriptural interpretations which fall
from the lips of the Brahmanas and listening to which every wise man acts
in the world, constitute nectar on earth and may also be likened to eyes
of remarkable excellence.[265] Witnessing the encounter between the
deities and the Asuras in days of old, and understanding the puissance of
the instructions that fell from the Brahmanas, my father became filled
with delight and wonder.[266] Beholding the puissance of high-souled
Brahmanas, my sire asked Chandramas the question, 'How do the Brahmanas
attain to success?

'Soma said, 'The Brahmanas become crowned with success through their
penances. Their strength consists in speech. The prowess of persons
belonging to the kingly order resides in their arms. The Brahmanas,
however, have speech for their weapons. Undergoing the discomforts of a
residence in the abode of his preceptor, the Brahmana should study the
Vedas or at least the Pranava. Divesting himself of wrath and renouncing
earthly attachments, he should become a Yati, viewing all things and all
creatures with equal eyes. If remaining in the abode of his sire he
masters all the Vedas and acquiring great knowledge attains to a position
that should command respect people still condemn him as untravelled or
homekeeping. Like a snake swallowing mice, the earth swallows up these
two, viz., a king that is unwilling to fight and a Brahmana that is
unwilling to leave home for acquiring knowledge.[267] Pride destroys the
prosperity of persons of little intelligence. A maiden, if she conceives,
becomes stained. A Brahmana incurs reproach by keeping at home. Even this
is what my father heard from Soma of wonderful aspect. My father, in
consequence of this, began to worship and reverence the Brahmanas. Like
him, I also worship and adore all Brahmanas of high vows.'

"Bhishma continued, "Hearing these words that fell from the mouth of that
prince of Danavas, Sakra began to worship the Brahmanas, and as a
consequence thereof he succeeded in obtaining the chiefdom of the
deities.'"



SECTION XXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Which amongst these three persons, O grandsire,
should be regarded as the best for making gifts unto, viz., one who is a
thorough stranger, or one who is living with and who has been known to
the giver for a long time, or one who presents himself before the giver,
coming from a long distance?'

"Bhishma said, 'All these are equal. The eligibility of some consists in
their soliciting alms for performing sacrifices or for paying the
preceptor's fee or for maintaining their spouses and children. The
eligibility of some for receiving gifts, consists in their following the
vow of wandering over the earth, never soliciting anything but receiving
when given. We should also give unto one what one seeks.[268] We should,
however, make gifts without afflicting those that depend upon us. Even
this is what we have heard. By afflicting one's dependants, one afflicts
one's own self. The stranger,--one, that is, who has come for the first
time,--should be regarded as a proper object of gifts. He who is familiar
and well-known and has been living with the giver, should be regarded in
the same light. The learned know that he too who comes from a distant
place should be regarded in an equal light.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'It is true that we should make gifts unto others
without afflicting anyone and without doing violence to the ordinances of
the scriptures. One should, however, correctly ascertain who the person
is that should be regarded as a proper object for making gifts. He should
be such that the gift itself, by being made over to him, may not
grieve.'[269]

"Bhishma said, 'If the Ritwik, the Purohita, the preceptor, the Acharya,
the disciple, the relative (by marriage), and kinsmen, happen to be
possessed of learning and free from malice, then should they be deemed
worthy of respect and worship. Those persons that do not possess such
qualifications cannot be regarded as worthy of gifts or hospitality.
Hence, one should with deliberation examine persons with whom one comes
into contact. Absence of wrath, truthfulness of speech, abstention from
injury, sincerity, peacefulness of conduct, the absence of pride,
modesty, renunciation, self-restraint, and tranquillity or contentment of
soul, he in whom these occur by nature, and in whom there are no wicked
acts, should be regarded as a proper object. Such a person deserves
honours. Whether the person he one who is well-known and familiar, or one
who has come newly, whether he has not been seen before, if he happens to
possess these qualifications, he should be regarded as worthy of honours
and hospitality. He who denies the authority of the Vedas, or strives to
show that the scriptures should be disregarded, or approves of all
breaches or restraint in society,--simply brings about his own ruin (and
should not be regarded as worthy of gifts). That Brahmana who is vain of
his learning, who speaks ill of the Vedas or who is devoted to the
science of useless disputation, or who is desirous of gaining victory (in
disputations) in assemblies of good men by disproving the reasons that
exist for morality and religion and ascribing everything to chance, or
who indulges in censuring and reproaching others or who reproves
Brahmanas, or who is suspicious of all persons, or who is foolish and
bereft of judgment, or who is bitter of speech, should be known to be as
hateful as a dog. As a dog encounters others, barking the while and
seeking to bite, such a person is even so, for he spends his breath in
vain and seeks to destroy the authority of all the scriptures. Those
practices that support society, the duties of righteousness, and all
those acts which are productive of benefit to one's own self, should be
attended to. A person that lives, attending to these, grows in prosperity
for everlasting time. By paying off the debt one owes to the deities by
performing sacrifices, that to the Rishis by studying the Vedas, that to
the Pitris by procreating children, that to the Brahmanas by making
presents unto them and that to guests by feeding them, in due order, and
with purity of intention, and properly attending to the ordinances of the
scriptures, a householder does not fall away from righteousness.'"[270]



SECTION XXXVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O best of the Bharatas, I wish to hear thee
discourse on the disposition of women. W omen are said to be the root of
all evil. They are all regarded as exceedingly frail.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old history of the
discourse between the celestial Rishi Narada and the (celestial)
courtezan Panchachuda. Once in ancient times, the celestial Rishi Narada,
having roamed over all the world, met the Apsara Panchachuda of faultless
beauty, having her abode in the region of Brahman. Beholding the Apsara
every limb of whose body was endued with great beauty, the ascetic
addressed her, saying, 'O thou of slender waist, I have a doubt in my
mind. Do thou explain it.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by the Rishi, the Apsara said unto
him, 'If the subject is one which is known to me and if thou thinkest me
competent to speak on it, I shall certainly say what is in my mind.'

"Narada said, 'O amiable one, I shall not certainly appoint thee to any
task that is beyond thy competence. O thou of beautiful face, I wish to
hear from thee of the disposition of women.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the celestial Rishi, that
foremost of Apsaras replied unto him, saying, 'I am unable, being myself
a woman, to speak ill of women. Thou knowest what women are and with what
nature they are endued. It behoveth thee not, O celestial Rishi, to set
me to such a task.' Unto her the celestial Rishi said, 'It is very true,
O thou of slender waist! One incurs fault by speaking what is untrue. In
saying, however, what is true, there can be no fault.' Thus addressed by
him, the Apsara Panchachuda of sweet smiles consented to answer Narada's
question. She then addressed herself to mention what the true and eternal
faults of women are!'

"Panchachuda said, 'Even if high-born and endued with beauty and
possessed of protectors, women wish to transgress the restraints assigned
to them. This fault truly stains them, O Narada! There is nothing else
that is more sinful than women. Verily, women, are the root of all
faults. That is, certainly known to thee, O Narada! Women, even when
possessed of husbands having fame and wealth, of handsome features and
completely obedient to them, are prepared to disregard them if they get
the opportunity. This, O puissant one, is a sinful disposition with us
women that, casting off modesty, we cultivate the companionship of men of
sinful habits and intentions. Women betray a liking for those men who
court them, who approach their presence, and who respectfully serve them
to even a slight extent. Through want of solicitation by persons of the
other sex, or fear of relatives, women, who are naturally impatient of
all restraints, do not transgress those that have been ordained for them,
and remain by the side of their husbands. There is none whom they are
incapable of admitting to their favours. They never take into
consideration the age of the person they are prepared to favour. Ugly or
handsome, if only the person happens to belong to the opposite sex, women
are ready to enjoy his companionship. That women remain faithful to their
lords is due not to their fear of sin, nor to compassion, nor to wealth,
nor to the affection that springs up in their hearts for kinsmen and
children. Women living in the bosom of respectable families envy the
condition of those members of their sex that are young and well-adorned
with jewels and gems and that lead a free life. Even those women that are
loved by their husbands and treated with great respect, are seen to
bestow their favours upon men that are hump-backed, that are blind, that
are idiots, or that are dwarfs. Women may be seen to like the
companionship of even those men that are destitute of the power of
locomotion or those men that are endued with great ugliness of features.
O great Rishi, there is no man in this world whom women may regard as
unfit for companionship. Through inability to obtain persons of the
opposite sex, or fear of relatives, or fear of death and imprisonment,
women remain, of themselves, within the restraints prescribed for them.
They are exceedingly restless, for they always hanker after new
companions. In consequence of their nature being unintelligible, they are
incapable of being kept in obedience by affectionate treatment. Their
disposition is such that they are incapable of being restrained when bent
upon transgression. Verily, women are like the words uttered by the
wise.[271] Fire is never satiated with fuel. Ocean can never be filled
with the waters that rivers bring unto him. The Destroyer is never
satiated with slaying even all living creatures. Similarly, women are
never satiated with men. This, O celestial Rishi. is another mystery
connected with women. As soon as they see a man of handsome and charming
features, unfailing signs of desire appear on their persons. They never
show sufficient regard for even such husbands as accomplish all their
wishes, as always do what is agreeable to them and as protect them from
want and danger. Women never regard so highly even articles of enjoyment
in abundance or ornaments or other possessions of an agreeable kind as
they do the companionship of persons of the opposite sex. The destroyer,
the deity of wind, death, the nether legions, the equine mouth that roves
through the ocean, vomiting ceaseless flames of fire, the sharpness of
the razor, virulent poison, the snake, and Fire--all these exist in a
state of union in women. That eternal Brahman whence the five great
elements have sprung into existence, whence the Creator Brahma hath
ordained the universe, and whence, indeed, men have sprung, verily from
the same eternal source have women sprung into existence. At that time,
again, O Narada, when women were created, these faults that I have
enumerated were planted in them!'"



SECTION XXXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'All men, O king, in this world, are seen to attach
themselves to women, overcome by the illusion that is created by the
divine Being. Similarly, women too are seen to attach themselves to men.
All this is seen taking place everywhere in the world. On this subject a
doubt exists in my mind. Why, O delighter of the Kurus, do men (when
women are stained with so many faults) still attach themselves to women?
Who, again, are those men with whom women are highly pleased and who are
they with whom they are displeased? It behoveth thee, O chief of men, to
explain to me how men are capable of protecting women? While men take
pleasure in women and sport with them, women, it seems, are engaged in
deceiving men. Then, again, if a man once falls into their hands, it is
difficult for him to escape from them. Like kine ever seeking pastures
new women seek new men one after another. That illusion which the Asura
Samvara possessed, that illusion which the Asura Namuchi possessed, that
illusion which Vali or Kumbbinasi had, the sum total thereof is possessed
by women. If man laughs, women laugh. If man weeps, they weep. If the
opportunity requires, they receive the man that is disagreeable to them
with agreeable words. That science of policy which the preceptor of the
Asuras knew, that science of policy which the preceptor of the
celestials, Vrihaspati, knew, cannot be regarded to be deeper or more
distinguished for subtility than what woman's intelligence naturally
brings forth. Verily how can women, therefore, be restrained by men? They
make a lie appear as truth, and a truth appear as a lie. They who can do
this,--I ask, O hero,--how can they be ruled by persons of the opposite
sex? It seems to me that Vrihaspati and other great thinkers, O slayer of
foes, evolved the science of policy from observation of the
understandings of women. Whether treated by men with respect or with
disdain, women are seen to turn the heads and agitate the hearts of
men.[272] Living creatures, O thou of mighty arms, are virtuous. Even
this is what has been heard by us. (How then, can this be consistent with
fact)? For treated with affection and respect or otherwise, women
(forming a fair portion of living creatures) are seen to deserve censure
for their conduct towards men.[273] This great doubt fills my mind, viz.,
when their behaviour is such, what man is there that can restrain them
within the bounds of righteousness? Do thou explain this to me, O highly
blessed scion of Kuru's race! It behoves thee to tell me, O chief of
Kuru's race, whether women are truly capable of being restrained within
the bonds prescribed by the scriptures or whether any one before our time
did really succeed in so restraining them.'"



SECTION XL

"Bhishma said, 'It is even so as thou sayest, O thou of mighty arms.
There is nothing untrue in all this that thou sayest, O thou of Kuru's
race, on the subject of women. In this connection I shall recite to thee
the old history of how in days of yore the high-souled Vipula had
succeeded in restraining women within the bounds laid down for them. I
shall also tell thee, O king, how women were created by the Grandsire
Brahman and the object for which they were created by Him. There is no
creature more sinful, O son, than women. Woman is a blazing fire. She is
the illusion, O king, that the Daitya Maya created. She is the sharp edge
of the razor. She is poison. She is a snake. She is fire. She is, verily,
all these united together. It has been heard by us that all persons of
the human race are characterised by righteousness, and that they, in
course of natural progress and improvement, attain to the status of
deities. This circumstance alarmed the deities. They, therefore, O
chastiser of foes, assembled together and repaired to the presence of the
Grandsire. Informing Him of what was in their minds, they stood silent in
his presence, with downcast eyes. The puissant Grand sire having
ascertained what was in the hearts of the deities, created women, with
the aid of an Atharvan rite. In a former creation, O son of Kunti, women
were all virtuous. Those, however, that sprang from this creation by
Brahman with the aid of an illusion became sinful. The grandsire bestowed
upon them the desire of enjoyment, all kinds of carnal pleasure. Tempted
by the desire of enjoyment, they began to pursue persons of the other
sex. The puissant lord of the deities created Wrath as the companion of
Lust. Persons of the male sex, yielding to the power of Lust and Wrath,
sought the companionship of women. Women have no especial acts prescribed
for them. Even this is the ordinance that was laid down. The Sruti
declares that women are endued with senses the most powerful, that they
have no scriptures to follow, and that they are living lies. Beds and
seats and ornaments and food and drink and the absence of all that is
respectable and righteous, indulgence in disagreeable words, and love of
sexual companionship,--these were bestowed by Brahman upon women. Men are
quite unable to restrain them within bounds. The Creator himself is
incapable of restraining them within the limits that are proper: what
need then be said of men? This, O chief of men, I heard in former days,
viz., how Vipula had succeeded in protecting his preceptor's spouse in
ancient times. There was in days of yore a highly blessed Rishi of the
name of Devasarman of great celebrity. He had a wife, Ruchi by name, who
was unequalled on earth for beauty. Her loveliness intoxicated every
beholder among the deities and Gandharvas and Danavas. The chastiser of
Paka, viz., Indra, the slayer of Vritra, O monarch, was in particular
enamoured of her and coveted her person. The great ascetic Devasarman was
fully cognisant of the disposition of women. He, therefore, to the best
of his power and energy, protected her (from every kind of evil
influence). The Rishi knew that Indra was restrained by no scruples in
the matter of seeking the companionship of other people's wives. It was
for this reason that he used to protect his spouse, putting forth all his
power. Once on a time, O son, the Rishi became desirous of performing a
sacrifice. He began to think of how (during his own absence from home)
his wife could be protected. Endued with high ascetic merit, he at last
hit upon the course he should adopt. Summoning his favourite disciple
whose name was Vipula and who was of Bhrigu's race, he said as follows:

"Devasarman said, 'I shall leave home (for a while) in order to perform a
sacrifice. The chief of the celestials always covets this Ruchi of mine.
Do thou, during my absence, protect her, putting forth all thy might!
Thou shalt pass thy time heedfully in view of Purandara. O foremost one
of Bhrigu's race, that Indra assumes various disguises.'

Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by his preceptor, the ascetic Vipula
with senses under control, always engaged in severe penances, possessed
of the splendour, O king, of fire or the sun conversant with all the
duties of righteousness, and ever truthful in speech, answered him,
saying, 'So be it.' Once more, however, as his preceptor was about to set
out Vipula asked him in these words.'

"Vipula said, Tell me, O Muni, what forms does Sakra assume when he
presents himself. Of what kind is his body and what is his energy? It
behoveth thee to say all this to me.'

"Bhishma continued, 'The illustrious Rishi then truly described unto the
high-souled Vipula all the illusions of Sakra, O Bharata.'

"Devasarman said, 'The puissant chastiser of Paka, O regenerate Rishi, is
full of illusion. Every moment he assumes those forms that he chooses.
Sometimes he wears a diadem and holds the thunderbolt. Sometimes armed
with the thunderbolt and wearing a crown on his head, he adorns himself
with ear-rings, in a moment he transforms himself into the shape and
aspect of Chandala. Sometimes, he appears with coronal locks on his head:
soon again, O son, he shows himself with matted locks, his person clad
the while in rags. Sometimes, he assumes a goodly and gigantic frame. The
next moment he transforms himself into one of emaciated limbs, and
dressed in rags. Sometimes he becomes fair, sometimes darkish, sometimes
dark of complexion. Sometimes he becomes ugly and sometimes as possessed
of great comeliness of person. Sometimes he shows himself as young and
sometimes as old Sometimes he appears as a Brahmana, sometimes as a
Kshatriya, sometimes as a Vaisya, and sometimes as a Sudra. Verily, he of
a hundred sacrifices appears at times as a person born of impure order,
that is as the son of a superior father by an inferior mother or of an
inferior father by a superior mother. Sometimes he appears as a parrot,
sometimes as a crow, sometimes as a swan, and sometimes as a cuckoo. He
assumes the forms also of a lion, a tiger, or an elephant. Sometimes he
shows himself as a god, sometimes as a Daitya, and sometimes he assumes
the guise of a king. Sometimes he appears as fat and plump. Sometimes as
one whose limbs have been broken by the action of disordered wind in the
system, sometimes as a bird, and sometimes as one of exceedingly ugly
features. Sometimes he appears as a quadruped. Capable of assuming any
form, he sometimes appears as an idiot destitute of all intelligence. He
assumes also the forms of flies and gnats. O Vipula, no one can make him
out in consequence of these innumerable disguises that he is capable of
assuming. The very Creator of the universe is not equal to that feat. He
makes himself invisible when he chooses. He is incapable of being seen
except with the eye of knowledge. The chief of the celestials sometimes
transforms himself into the wind. The chastiser of Paka always assumes
these disguises. Do thou, therefore, O Vipula, protect this
slender-waisted spouse of mine with great care. O foremost one of
Bhrigu's race, do thou take every care for seeing that the chief of the
celestials may not defile this spouse of mine like a wretched dog licking
the Havi kept in view of a sacrifice. Having said these words, the
highly-blessed Muni, viz., Devasarman, intend upon performing a
sacrifice, set out from his abode, O chief of the Bharatas. Hearing these
words of his preceptor, Vipula began to think, 'I shall certainly protect
this lady in every respect from the puissant chief of the celestials. But
what should be the means? What can I do in this matter of protecting the
wife of my preceptor? The chief of the celestials is endued with large
powers of illusion. Possessed of great energy, he is difficult of being
resisted. Indra cannot be kept out by enclosing this retreat of ours or
fencing this yard, since he is capable of assuming innumerable forms.
Assuming the form of the wind, the chief of the celestials may assault
the spouse of my preceptor. The best course, therefore, for me, would be
to enter (by Yoga-power) the body of this lady and remain there. By
putting forth my prowess I shall not be able to protect the lady, for the
puissant chastiser of Paka, it has been heard by me, is capable of
assuming any form he likes. I shall, therefore, protect this one from
Indra by my Yoga-power. For carrying out my object I shall with my body
enter the body of this lady. If my preceptor, coming back, beholds his
spouse defiled, he will, without doubt, curse me through wrath, for
endued with great ascetic merit, he is possessed of spiritual vision.
This lady is incapable of being protected in the way in which other women
are protected by men, since the chief of the celestials is endued with
large powers of illusion. Alas, the situation in which I find myself is
very critical. The behest of my preceptor should certainly be obeyed by
me. If, therefore, I protect her by my Yoga-power, the feat will be
regarded by all as a wonderful one. By my Yoga-power, therefore, I shall
enter the body of my preceptor's lady. I shall stay within her and yet
not touch her person, like a drop of water on a lotus-leaf which lies on
it and yet does not drench it at all. If I be free from the taint of
passion, I cannot incur any fault by doing what I wish to do. As a
traveller, in course of his sojourn, takes up his residence (for a while)
in any empty mansion he finds, I shall, after the same manner, reside
this day within the body of my preceptor's lady Verily, with mind rapt up
in Yoga, I shall dwell today in this lady's body! Giving his best
consideration to these points of righteousness, thinking of all the Vedas
and their branches, and with eye directed to the large measure of
penances which his preceptor had and which he himself also was possessed
of, and having settled in his mind, with a view only to protect the lady,
to enter her person by Yoga-power. Vipula of Bhrigu's race took great
care (for accomplishing his purpose). Listen now to me, O monarch, as I
recite to thee what he did. Endued with great penances, Vipula sat
himself down by the side of his preceptor's spouse as she of faultless
features was sitting in her cottage, Vipula then began to discourse to
her bringing her over to the cause of righteousness and truth. Directing
his eyes then to hers and uniting the rays of light that emanated from
her organs of vision with those that issued from his, Vipula (in his
subtile form) entered the lady's body even as the element of wind enters
that of ether of space. Penetrating her eyes with his eyes and her face
with his face, Vipula stayed, without moving, within her invisibly, like
her shadow. Restraining every part of the lady's body, Vipula continued
to dwell within her, intent on protecting her from Indra. The lady
herself knew nothing of this. It was in this way, O monarch, that Vipula
continued to protect the lady till the time of his high-souled
preceptor's coming back after accomplishing the sacrifice which he had
gone out to perform.'"



SECTION XLI

'Bhishma said, One day the chief of the celestials assuming a form of
celestial beauty, came to the retreat of the Rishi, thinking that the
opportunity he had been expecting had at last come. Verily, O king,
having assumed a form unrivalled for comeliness and exceedingly tempting
to women and highly agreeable to look at, Indra entered the ascetic's
asylum. He saw the body of Vipula staying in a sitting posture, immovable
as a stake, and with eyes destitute of vision, like a picture drawn on
the canvas. And he saw also that Ruchi was seated there, adorned with
eyes whose ends were extremely beautiful, possessed of full and rotund
hips, and having a deep and swelling bosom. Her eyes were large and
expansive like the petals of the lotus, and her face was as beautiful and
sweet as the moon at full. Seeing Indra come in that guise, the lady
wished to rise up and offer him a welcome. Her wonder having been excited
at the unrivalled beauty of form which the person possessed, she very
much wished to ask him as to who he was. Although, however, she wished to
rise up and offer him a welcome, yet her limbs having been restrained by
Vipula who was dwelling within her, she failed, O king, to do what she
wished. In fact, she was unable to move from the place where she sat. The
chief of the celestials then addressed her in agreeable words uttered
with a sweet voice. Indeed, he said, 'O thou of sweet smiles, know that I
am Indra, arrived here for thy sake! Know, O sweet lady, that I am
afflicted by the deity of desire provoked by thoughts of thee! O thou of
beautiful brows, I have come to thy presence. Time wears off.'[274] These
words that Indra spoke were heard by the ascetic Vipula. Remaining within
the body of his preceptor's wife, he saw everything that occurred. The
lady of faultless beauty, though she heard what Indra said, was, however,
unable to rise up for welcoming or honouring the chief of the celestials.
Her senses restrained by Vipula, she was unable to utter a word in reply.
That scion of Bhrigu's race, of mighty energy, judging from the
indications afforded by the body of his preceptor's wife that she was not
unwilling to receive Indra with kindness, restrained her limbs and senses
all the more effectually, O king, by his Yoga-powers. With Yoga-bonds he
bound up all her senses. Beholding her seated without any indication of
agitation on her person, the lord of Sachi, abashed a little, once more
addressed that lady who was stupefied by the Yoga-powers of her husband's
disciple, in these words, 'Come, come, O sweet lady!' Then the lady
endeavoured to answer him. Vipula, however restrained the words that she
intended to utter. The words, therefore, that actually escaped her lips
(under the influence of Vipula) were. 'What is the reason of thy coming
hither?' These words adorned with grammatical refinements, issued out of
her mouth that was as beautiful as the moon.[275] Subject to the
influence of another, she uttered these words, but became rather ashamed
for uttering them. Hearing her, Purandara became exceedingly cheerless.
Observing that awkward result, the chief of the celestials, O monarch,
adorned with a thousand eyes saw every thing with his spiritual eye. He
then beheld the ascetic staying within the body of the lady. Indeed, the
ascetic remained within the body of his preceptor's wife like an image or
reflection on a mirror. Beholding the ascetic endued with the terrible
might of penances, Purandara, O monarch, fearing the Rishi's curse,
trembled in fright. Vipula then, possessed of high ascetic might, left
the body of his preceptor's wife and returned to his own body that was
lying near. He then addressed the terrified Indra in the following words:

"Vipula said, 'O wicked-souled Purandara, O thou of sinful mind, O wretch
that hast no control over thy senses, neither the deities nor human
beings will worship thee for any length of time! Hast thou forgotten it.
O Sakra,--does it not still dwell in thy remembrance,--that Gautama had
cursed thee in consequence of which thy body became disfigured with a
thousand sex-marks, which, owing to the Rishi's compassion, were
afterwards changed into organs of vision? I know that thou art of an
exceedingly foolish understanding, that thy soul is uncleansed, and that
thou art of an exceedingly unstable mind! O fool, know that this lady is
being protected by me. O sinful wretch, go back to that place whence thou
tamest. O thou of foolish soul, I do not consume thee today into ashes
with my energy. Verily, I am filled with compassion for thee. It is for
this that I do not, O Vasava, wish to burn thee. My preceptor, endued
with great intelligence, is possessed of terrible might. With eyes
blazing with wrath, he would, if he saw thee, have burnt thy sinful self
today. Thou shouldst not, O Sakra, do like this again. The Brahmanas
should be regarded by thee. See that thou dost not, with thy sons and
counsellors, meet with destruction, afflicted by the might of the
Brahmanas. Thou thinkest that thou art an immortal and that, therefore,
art at liberty to proceed in this way. Do not, however, disregard the
Brahmanas. Know that there is nothing unattainable by penance.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the high-souled Vipula, Sakra
without saying anything, and overwhelmed with shame, made himself
invisible. A moment after he had gone away, Devasarman of high ascetic
merit, having accomplished the sacrifice he had intended to perform, came
back to his own asylum. When his preceptor came back, Vipula, who had
done an agreeable deed, gave, unto him his wife of faultless beauty whom
he had successfully protected against the machinations of Indra. Of
tranquil soul and full of reverence for his preceptor, Vipula
respectfully saluted him and stood in his presence with a fearless heart.
After his preceptor had rested a while and when he was seated with his
wife on the same seat, Vipula represented unto him everything that Sakra
had done. Hearing these words of Vipula, that foremost of Munis, endued
with great prowess, became highly gratified with him for his conduct and
disposition, his penances, and his observances. Observing Vipula's
conduct towards himself--his preceptor--and his devotion also, and noting
his steadiness in virtue, the puissant Devasarman exclaimed, "Excellent,
excellent!' The righteous-souled Devasarman, receiving his virtuous
disciple with a sincere welcome, honoured him with a boon. Indeed,
Vipula, steady in virtue obtained from his preceptor the boon that he
would never swerve or fall away from righteousness. Dismissed by his
preceptor he left his abode and practised the most severe austerities.
Devasarman also, of severe penances, with his spouse, began from that day
to live in those solitary woods, perfectly fearless of him who had slain
Vala and Vritra.'"



SECTION XLII

"Bhishma said, 'Having accomplished his preceptor's behest, Vipula
practised the most severe penances. Possessed of great energy, he at last
regarded himself as endued with sufficient ascetic merit, Priding himself
upon the feat he had achieved, he wandered fearlessly and contentedly
over the earth, O monarch, regarded by all as one possessed of great fame
for what he had done. The puissant Bhargava regarded that he had
conquered both the worlds by that feat of his as also by his severe
penances. After some time had passed away, O delighter of the Kurus, the
occasion came for a ceremony of gifts to take place with respect to the
sister of Ruchi. Abundant wealth and corn were to be given away in
it.[276] Meanwhile, a certain celestial damsel endued with great beauty,
was journeying through the skies. From her body as she coursed through
the welkin, some flowers dropped down on the earth. Those flowers
possessed of celestial fragrance fell on a spot not far from the retreat
of Ruchi's husband. As the flowers lay scattered on the ground, they were
picked up by Ruchi of beautiful eyes. Soon after an invitation came to
Ruchi from the country of the Angas. The sister, referred to above, of
Ruchi, named Prabhavati, was the spouse of Chitraratha, the ruler of the
Angas. Ruchi, of very superior complexion, having attached those flowers
to her hair, went to the palace of the king of the Angas in answer to the
invitation she had received. Beholding those flowers on her hair the
queen of the Angas, possessed of beautiful eyes, urged her sister to
obtain some for her. Ruchi, of beautiful face, speedily informed her
husband of that request of her sister. The Rishi accepted the prayer of
his sister-in-law. Summoning Vipula into his presence Devasarman of
severe penances commanded his disciple to bring him some flowers of the
same kind, saying, 'Go, go!' Accepting without hesitation the behest of
his preceptor, the great ascetic Vipula, O king, answered, 'So be it!'
and then proceeded to that spot whence the lady Ruchi had picked up the
flowers that were coveted by her sister. Arrived at that spot where the
flowers (picked up by Ruchi) had fallen from the welkin, Vipula saw some
others still lying scattered. They were all as fresh as if they had been
newly plucked from the plants whereon they had grown. None of them had
drooped in the least. He took up those celestial flowers of great beauty.
Possessed of celestial fragrance, O Bharata, Vipula got them there as the
result of his severe penances. The accomplisher of his preceptor's
behest, having obtained them, he felt great delight and set out speedily
for the city of Champa adorned with festoons of Champaka flowers. As he
proceeded, he saw on his way a human couple moving in a circle hand in
hand. One of them made a rapid step and thereby destroyed the cadence of
the movement. For this reason, O king, a dispute arose between them.
Indeed, one of them charged the other, saying, 'Thou hast made a quicker
step!' The other answered, 'No, verily', as each maintained his own
opinion obstinately, each, O king, asserted what the other denied, and
denied what the other asserted. While thus disputing with each other with
great assurance, an oath was then heard among them. Indeed, each of them
suddenly named Vipula in what they uttered. The oath each of them took
was even this, 'That one amongst us two who speaketh falsely, shall in
the next world, meet with the end which will be the regenerate Vipula's!'
Hearing these words of theirs, Vipula's face became very cheerless. He
began to reflect, saying unto himself, 'I have undergone severe penances.
The dispute between this couple is hot. To me, again, it is painful. What
is the sin of which I have been guilty that both these persons should
refer to my end in the next world as the most painful one among those
reserved for all creatures?' Thinking in this strain, Vipula, O best of
monarchs, hung down his head, and with a cheerless mind began to
recollect what sin he had done. Proceeding a little way he beheld six
other men playing with dice made of gold and silver. Engaged in play,
those individuals seemed to him to be so excited that the hair on their
bodies stood on end. They also (upon a dispute having arisen among them)
were heard by Vipula to take the same oath that he had already heard the
first couple to take. Indeed, their words had reference in the same way
to Vipula, 'He amongst us who, led by cupidity, will act in an improper
way, shall meet with that end which is reserved for Vipula in the next
world!' Hearing these words, however, Vipula, although he strove
earnestly to recollect failed to remember any transgression of his from
even his earliest years, O thou of Kuru's race. Verily he began to burn
like a fire placed in the midst of another fire. Hearing that curse, his
mind burnt with grief. In this state of anxiety a long time elapsed. At
last he recollected the manner in which he had acted in protecting his
preceptor's wife from the machinations of Indra. 'I had penetrated the
body of that lady, placing limb within limb, face within face, Although I
had acted in this way, I did not yet tell my preceptor the truth!' Even
this was the transgression. O thou of Kuru's race which Vipula
recollected in himself. Indeed, O blessed monarch, without doubt that was
the transgression which he had actually committed. Coming to the city of
Champa, he gave the flowers to his preceptor. Devoted to superiors and
seniors, he worshipped his preceptor in due form.'"



SECTION XLIII

"Bhishma said, 'Beholding his disciple returned from his mission,
Devasarman of great energy addressed him in words which I shall recite to
thee O king!'

"Davasarman said, 'What hast thou seen, O Vipula, in course of thy
progress, O disciple, through the great forest' 'They whom thou hast seen
knew thee, O Vipula. I, as also my spouse Ruchi, know how thou hadst
acted in the matter of protecting Ruchi.'

"Vipula said, 'O regenerate Rishi, who are those two whom I first saw?
Who also are those other six whom I saw subsequently? All of them know
me: who, indeed, are they to whom thou alludest in thy speech to me?'

"Devasarman said, The first couple, O regenerate one, whom thou sawest,
are Day and Night. They are ceaselessly moving like a circle. Both of
them know the transgression of which thou hast been guilty, those other
men (six in number) whom, O learned Brahmana, thou sawest playing
cheerfully at dice, are the six Seasons. They also are acquainted with
thy transgressions. Having committed a sin in secrecy, no sinful man
should cherish the assuring thought that his transgression is known only
to himself and not to any one else. When a man perpetrates a sinful deed
in secret, the Seasons as also Day and Night behold it always. Those
regions that are reserved for the sinful shall be thine (for what thou
hast done) What thou hadst done thou didst not tell me. That thy sin was
not known to any one, was thy belief, and this conviction had filled thee
with joy. Thou didst not inform the preceptor of the whole truth,
choosing to hide from him a material portion. The Seasons, and Day and
Night, whom thou hast heard speak in that strain, thought it proper to
remind thee of thy transgression. Day and Night and the Seasons are ever
conversant of all the good and the bad deeds that are in a man. They
spoke to thee in that way, O regenerate one, because they have full
knowledge of what thou hadst done but which thou hadst not the courage to
inform me of, fearing thou hadst done wrong. For this reason those
regions that are reserved for the sinful will be thine as much. Thou
didst not tell me what thou hadst done. Thou weft fully capable, O
regenerate one, of protecting my spouse whose disposition by nature, is
sinful. In doing what thou didst, thou didst not commit any sin. I was,
for this, gratified with thee! O best of Brahmanas, if I had known thee
to have acted wickedly, I would without hesitation, have cursed thee.
Women become united with men. Such union is very desirable with men. Thou
hadst, however, protected my wife in a different spirit. If thou hadst
acted otherwise, a curse would have been uttered upon thee. Even this is
what I think. Thou hadst O son, protected my spouse. The manner in which
thou didst it hath now become known to me as if thou hadst thyself
informed me of it. I have, O son, become gratified with thee. Relieved of
all anxiety, thou shalt go to heaven!' Having said these words unto
Vipula, the great Rishi Devasarman, ascended to heaven with his wife and
his disciple and began to pass his time there in great happiness. In
course of conversation, O king, on a former occasion, the great ascetic
Markandeya had narrated to me this history on the banks of the Ganga. I,
therefore, recite to thee. Women should always be protected by thee (from
temptations and opportunities of every kind). Amongst them both kinds are
to be seen, that is, those that are virtuous and those that are not so.
Those women that are virtuous are highly blessed. They are the mothers of
the universe (for they it is that cherish all creatures on every side).
They, it is, O king, that uphold the earth with all her waters and
forests. Those women that are sinful, that are of wicked behaviour, that
are the destroyers of their races, and that are wedded to sinful
resolves, are capable of being ascertained by indications, expressive of
the evil that is in them, which appear, O king, on their bodies. It is
even thus that high-souled persons are capable of protecting women. They
cannot, O tiger among kings, be protected in any other way. Women, O
chief of men, are fierce. They are endued with fierce prowess. They have
none whom they love or like so much as they that have sexual congress
with them. Women are like those (Atharvan) incantations that are
destructive of life. Even after they have consented to live with one,
they are prepared to abandon him for entering into engagements with
others. They are never satisfied with one person of the opposite sex, O
son of Pandu! Men should feel no affection for them. Nor should they
entertain any jealousy on account of them, O king! having a regard only
for the considerations of virtue, men should enjoy their society, not
with enthusiasm and attachment but with reluctance and absence of
attachment. By acting otherwise, a man is sure to meet with destruction,
O delighter of the Kurus. Reason is respected at all times and under all
circumstances. Only one man, viz., Vipula, had succeeded in protecting
woman. There is none else, O king, in the three worlds who is capable of
protecting women.'"



SECTION XLIV

"Yudhishthira said, "Tell me of that, O grandsire, which is the root of
all duties, which is the root of kinsmen, of home, of the Pitris and of
guests. I think this should be regarded as the foremost of all duties,
(viz., the marriage of one's daughter). Tell me, however, O king, upon
what sort of a person should one bestow one's daughter?'

"Bhishma said, 'Having enquired into the conduct and disposition of the
person, his learning and acquirements, his birth, and his acts, good
people should then bestow their daughter upon accomplished bridegrooms.
All righteous Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira, act in this way (in the matter
of the bestowal of their daughters). This is known as the Brahma
marriage, O Yudhishthira! Selecting an eligible bridegroom, the father of
the girl should cause him to marry his daughter, having, by presents of
diverse kinds, induced the bridegroom to that act. This form of marriage
constitutes the eternal practice of all good Kshatriyas. When the father
of the girl', disregarding his own wishes, bestows his daughter upon a
person whom the daughter likes and who reciprocates the girl's
sentiments, the form of marriage, O Yudhishthira, is called Gandharva by
those that are conversant with the Vedas. The wise have said this, O
king, to be the practice of the Asuras, viz., wedding a girl after
purchasing her at a high cost and after gratifying the cupidity of her
kinsmen. Slaying and cutting off the heads of weeping kinsmen, the
bridegroom sometimes forcibly takes away the girl he would wed. Such
wedding, O son, is called by the name of Rakshasa. Of these five (the
Brahma, the Kshatra, the Gandharva, the Asura, and the Rakshasa), three
are righteous, O Yudhishthira, and two are unrighteous. The Paisacha and
the Asura forms should never be resorted to.[277] The Brahma, Kshatra,
and Gandharva forms are righteous, O prince of men! Pure or mixed, these
forms should be resorted to, without doubt. A Brahmana can take three
wives. A Kshatriya can take two wives. As regards the Vaisya, he should
take a wife from only his own order. The children born of these wives
should all be regarded as equal.[278] Of the three wives of a Brahmana,
she taken from his own order should be regarded as the foremost.
Similarly, of the two wives permitted to the Kshatriya, she taken from
his own order should be regarded as superior. Some say that persons
belonging to the three higher orders may take, only for purposes of
enjoyment (and not for those of virtue), wives from the lowest or the
Sudra order. Others, however, forbid the practice.

The righteous condemn the practice of begetting issue upon Sudra women. A
Brahmana, by begetting children upon a Sudra woman, incurs the liability
of performing an expiation. A person of thirty years of age should wed a
girl of ten years of age called a Nagnika.[279] Or, a person of one and
twenty years of age should wed a girl of seven years of age. That girl
who has no brother nor father should not be wed, O chief of Bharata's
race, for she may be intended as Putrika of her sire.[280] After the
appearance of puberty, the girl (if not married) should wait for three
years. On the fourth year, she should look for a husband herself (without
waiting any longer for her kinsmen to select one for her). The offspring
of such a girl do not lose their respectability, nor does union with such
a girl become disgraceful. If, instead of selecting a husband for
herself, she acts otherwise, she incurs the reproach of Prajapati
herself. One should wed that girl who is not a Sapinda of one's mother or
of the same Gotra with one's father. Even this is the usage (consistent
with the sacred law) which Manu has declared.'[281]

"Yudhishthira said, 'Desirous of marriage someone actually gives a dower
to the girl's kinsmen; someone says, the girl's kinsmen consenting
promises to give a dower; someone says, 'I shall abduct the girl by
force;' someone simply displays his wealth (to the girl's kinsmen,
intending to offer a portion thereof as dower for her); someone, again,
actually takes the hand of the girl with rites of wedding. I ask thee, O
grandsire, whose wife does the girl actually become? Unto its that are
desirous of knowing the truth, thou art the eye with which to behold.'

"Bhishma said, 'Whatever acts of men have been approved or settled in
consultation by the wise, are seen to be productive of good. False
speech, however, is always sinful.[282] The girl himself that becomes
wife, the sons born of her, the Ritwiks and preceptors and disciples and
Upadhyayas present at the marriage all become liable to expiation if the
girl bestow her hand upon a person other than he whom she had promised to
wed. Some are of opinion that no expiation is necessary for such conduct.
Manu does not applaud the practice of a girl living with a person whom
she does not like.[283] Living as wife with a person whom she does not
like, leads to disgrace and sin. No one incurs much sin in any of these
cases that follow. In forcibly abducting for marriage a girl that is
bestowed upon the abductor by the girl's kinsmen, with due rites, as also
a girl for whom dower has been paid and accepted, there is no great sin.
Upon the girl's kinsmen having expressed their consent, Mantras and Homa
should be resorted to. Such Mantras truly accomplish their purpose.
Mantras and Homa recited and performed in the case of a girl that has not
been bestowed by her kinsmen, do not accomplish their purpose. The
engagement made by the kinsmen of a girl is, no doubt, binding and
sacred. But the engagement that is entered into by the wedder and wedded,
with the aid of Mantras, is very much more so (for it is this engagement
that really creates the relationship of husband and wife). According to
the dictates of the scriptures, the husband should regard his wife as an
acquisition due to his own acts of a previous life or to what has been
ordained by God. One, therefore, incurs no reproach by accepting for wife
a girl that had been promised to another by her kinsmen or for whom dower
had been accepted by them from another.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'When after the receipt of dower for a girl, the
girl's sire sees a more eligible person present himself for her
hand,--one, that is who is endued with the aggregate of Three in
judicious proportions, does the girl's sire incur reproach by rejecting
the person from whom dower had been received in favour of him that is
more eligible? In such a case either alternative seems to be fraught with
fault, for to discard the person to whom the girl has been promised can
never be honourable, while to reject the person that is more eligible can
never be good (considering the solemn obligation there is of bestowing
one's daughter on the most eligible person). I ask, how should the sire
conduct himself so that he might be said to do that which is beneficial?
To us, of all duties this seems to demand the utmost measure of
deliberation. We are desirous of ascertaining the truth. Thou, indeed,
art our eyes! Do thou explain this to us. I am never satiated with
listening to thee!'

'Bhishma said, 'The gift of the dower does not cause the status of wife
to attach to the girl. This is well-known to the person paying it. He
pays it simply as the price of the girl. Then again they that are good
never bestow their daughters, led by the dowers that others may offer.
When the person desirous of wedding happens to be endued with such
qualities as do not go down with the girl's kinsmen, it is then that
kinsmen demand dower from him. That person, however, who won over by
another's accomplishments, addresses him, saying, 'Do thou wed my girl,
adorning her with proper ornaments of gold and gems,'--and that person
who complies with this request, cannot be said to demand dower or give
it, for such a transaction is not really a sale. The bestowal of a
daughter upon acceptance of what may strictly be regarded as gifts (of
affection or love) is the eternal practice. In matters of marriage some
fathers say, 'I shall not bestow my daughter upon such and such a
person;' some say, 'I shall bestow my daughter upon such a one.'--Some
again say with vehemence, 'I must bestow my daughter upon such an
individual.' These declarations do not amount to actual marriage. People
are seen to solicit one another for the hands of maidens (and promise and
retreat). Till the hand is actually taken with due rites, marriage cannot
be said to take place. It has been beard by us that' even this was the
boon granted to men in days of old by the Maruts in respect of
maidens[284]. The Rishis have laid the command upon all men that maidens
should never be bestowed upon persons unless the latter happen to be most
fit or eligible. The daughter is the root of desire and of descendants of
the collateral line. Even this is what I think.[285] The practice has
been known to human beings from a long time,--the practice, of sale and
purchase of the daughter. In consequence of such familiarity with the
practice, thou mayst be able, upon careful examination, to find
innumerable faults in it. The gift or acceptance of dower alone could not
be regarded as creating the status of husband and wife. Listen to what I
say on this head.

"Formerly, having defeated all the Magadhas, the Kasis, and the Kosalas,
I brought away by force two maidens for Vichitravirya. One of those two
maidens was wedded with due rites. The other maiden was not formally
wedded on the ground that she was one for whom dowry had been paid in the
form of valour. My uncle of Kuru's race, viz., king Valhika, said that
the maiden so brought away and not wedded with due rites should be set
free. That maiden, therefore, was recommended to Vichitravirya for being
married by him according to due rites. Doubting my father's words I
repaired to others for asking their opinion. I thought that my sire was
exceedingly punctilious in matters of morality. I then went to my sire
himself, O king, and addressed him these words from desire of knowing
something about the practices of righteous people in respect of marriage,
'I desire, O sire, to know what in truth the practices are of righteous
people.' I repeated the expression of my wish several times, so great was
my eagerness and curiosity. After I had uttered those words, that
foremost of righteous men, viz., my sire, Valhika answered me, saying,
'If in your opinion the status of husband and wife be taken to attach on
account of the gift and acceptance of dowry and not from the actual
taking of the maiden's hand with due rites, the father of the maiden (by
permitting his daughter to go away with the giver of the dowry) would so
himself to be the follower of a creed other than that which is derivable
from the ordinary scriptures. Even this is what the accepted scriptures
declare. Persons conversant with morality and duty do not allow that
their words are at all authoritative who say that the status of husband
and wife arises from the gift and acceptance of dowry, and not from the
actual taking of the hand with due rites. The saying is well-known that
the status of husband and wife is created by actual bestowal of the
daughter by the sire (and her acceptance by the husband with due rites).
The status of wife cannot attach to maidens through sale and purchase.
They who regard such status to be due to sale and the gift of dowry are
persons that are certainly unacquainted with the scriptures. No one
should bestow his daughter upon such persons. In fact, they are not men
to whom one may marry his daughter. A wife should never be purchased. Nor
should a father sell his daughter. Only those persons of sinful soul who
are possessed, besides, by cupidity, and who sell and purchase female
slaves for making serving women, regard the status of wife as capable of
arising from the gift and acceptance of a dowry. On this subject some
people on one occasion had asked prince Satyavat the following question,
'If the giver of a dowry unto the kinsmen of a maiden happens to die
before marriage, can another person take the hand of that maiden in
marriage? We have doubts on this matter. Do thou remove these doubts of
ours, for thou art endued with great wisdom and art honoured by the wise.
Be thou the organ of vision unto ourselves that are desirous of learning
the truth.' Prince Satyavat answered saying, 'The kinsmen of the maiden
should bestow her upon him whom they consider eligible. There need be no
scruples in this. The righteous act in this way without taking note of
the giver of the dower even if he be alive; while, as regards the giver
that is dead, there is not the slightest doubt. Some say that the virgin
wife or widow,--one, that is, whose marriage has not been consummated
with her husband by actual sexual congress in consequence of his absence
or death,--may be allowed to unite herself with her husband's younger
brother or such other relation. The husband dying before such
consummation, the virgin-widow may either surrender herself to her
husband's younger brother or betake herself to the practice of penances.
In the opinion of some, the younger brother of the husband or such other
relation may thus use the unused wife or widow, though others maintain
that such practice, notwithstanding its prevalence, springs from desire
instead of being a scriptural ordinance. They that say so are clearly of
opinion that the father of a maiden has the right to bestow her upon any
eligible person, disregarding the dowry previously given by another and
accepted by himself. If after the hand of a maiden has been promised all
the initial rites before marriage be performed, the maiden may still be
bestowed upon a person other than the one unto whom she had been
promised. Only the giver incurs the sin of falsehood: so far, however, as
the status of wife is concerned, no injury can occur thereto. The Mantras
in respect of marriage accomplish their object of bringing about the
indissoluble union of marriage at the seventh step. The maiden becomes
the wife of him unto whom the gift is actually made with water.[286] The
gift of maidens should be made in the following way. The wise know it for
certain. A superior Brahmana should wed a maiden that is not unwilling,
that belongs to a family equal to his own in purity or status, and that
is given away by her brother. Such a girl should be wed in the presence
of fire, with due rites, causing her, amongst other things, to
circumambulate for the usual number of times."



SECTION XLV

"Yudhishthira said, 'If a person, after having given dowry for a maiden,
goes away, how should the maiden's father or other kinsmen who are
competent to bestow her, act? Do tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'Such a maiden, if she happens to be the daughter of a
sonless and rich father, should be maintained by the father (in view of
the return of him who has given the dowry). Indeed, if the father does
not return the dowry unto the kinsmen of the giver, the maiden should be
regarded as belonging to the giver of the dowry. She may even raise
offspring for the giver (during his absence) by any of those means that
are laid down in the scriptures. No person, however, can be competent to
wed her according to due rites. Commanded by her sire, the princess
Savitri had in days of old chosen a husband and united herself with him.
This act of hers is applauded by some; but others conversant with the
scriptures, condemn it. Others that are righteous have not acted in this
way. Others hold that the conduct of the righteous should ever be
regarded as the foremost evidence of duty or morality.[287] Upon this
subject Sukratu, the grandson of the high-souled Janaka, the ruler of the
Videhas, has declared the following opinion. There is the well-known
declaration of the scriptures that women are incompetent to enjoy freedom
at any period of their life. If this were not the path trodden by the
righteous, how could this scriptural declaration exist? As regards the
righteous, therefore, how can there be any question or doubt in respect
of this matter? How can people condemn that declaration by choosing to
conduct themselves otherwise? The unrighteous dereliction of eternal
usage is regarded as the practice of the Asuras. Such practice we never
hear of in the conduct of the ancients[288] the relationship of husband
and wife is very subtile (having reference to the acquisition of destiny,
and, therefore, capable of being understood with the aid of only the
inspired declarations in scriptures). It is different from the natural
relationship of male and female which consists only in the desire for
sexual pleasure. This also was said by the king alluded to of Janaka's
race.'[289]

"Yudhishthira said, 'Upon what authority is the wealth of men inherited
(by others when they happen to have daughters)? In respect of her sire
the daughter should be regarded the same as the son.'

"Bhishma said, 'The son is even as one's own self, and the daughter is
like unto the son. How, therefore, can another take the wealth when one
lives in one's own self in the form of one's daughter? Whatever wealth is
termed the Yautuka property of the mother, forms the portion of the
maiden daughter. If the maternal grandfather happens to die without
leaving sons, the daughter's son should inherit it. The daughter's son
offers pindas to his own father and the father of his mother. Hence, in
accordance with considerations of justice, there is no difference between
the son and the daughter's son. When a person has got only a daughter and
she has been invested by him with the status of a son, if he then happens
to have a son, such a son (instead of taking all the wealth of his sire)
shares the inheritance with the daughter.[290] When, again, a person has
got a daughter and she has been invested by him with the status of a son,
if he then happens to take a son by adoption or purchase then the
daughter is held to be superior to such a son (for she takes three shares
of her father's wealth, the son's share being limited to only the
remaining two). In the following case I do not see any reason why the
status of a daughter's son should attach to the sons of one's daughter.
The case is that of the daughter who has been sold by her sire. The sons
born of a daughter that has been sold by her sire for actual price,
belong exclusively to their father (even if he do not beget them himself
but obtain them according to the rules laid down in the scriptures for
the raising of issue through the agency of others). Such sons can never
belong, even as daughter's sons, to their maternal grandfather in
consequence of his having sold their mother for a price and lost all his
rights in or to her by that act.[291] Such sons, again, become full of
malice, unrighteous in conduct, the misappropriators of other people's
wealth, and endued with deceit and cunning. Having sprung from that
sinful form of marriage called Asura, the issue becomes wicked in
conduct. Persons acquainted with the histories of olden times, conversant
with duties, devoted to the scriptures and firm in maintaining the
restraints therein laid down, recite in this connection some metrical
lines sung in days of yore by Yama. Even this is what Yama had sung. That
man who acquires wealth by selling his own son, or who bestows his
daughter after accepting a dower for his own livelihood, has to sink in
seven terrible hells one after another, known by the name of Kalasutra.
There that wretch has to feed upon sweat and urine and stools during the
whole time. In that form of marriage which is called Arsha, the person
who weds has to give a bull and a cow and the father of the maiden
accepts the gift. Some characterise this gift as a dowry (or price),
while some are of opinion that it should not be regarded in that light.
The true opinion, however, is that a gift for such a purpose, be it of
small value or large, should, O king, be regarded as dowry or price, and
the bestowal of the daughter under such circumstances should be viewed as
a sale. Notwithstanding the fact of its having been practised by a few
persons it can never be taken as the eternal usage. Other forms of
marriage are seen, practised by men, such as marrying girls after
abducting them by force from amidst their kinsmen. Those persons who have
sexual intercourse with a maiden, after reducing her to subjection by
force, are regarded as perpetrators of sin. They have to sink in darkest
hell.[292] Even a human being with whom one has no relationship of blood
should not form the subject of sale. What need then be said of one's own
issue? With the wealth that is acquired by doing sinful deeds, no action
leading to merit can be performed.'"



SECTION XLVI

"Bhishma said, They that are conversant with ancient history recite the
following verse of Daksha, the son of Prachetas: That maiden, in respect
of whom nothing is taken by her kinsmen in the form of dowry cannot be
said to be sold.[293] Respect, kind treatment, and everything else that
is agreeable, should all be given unto the maiden whose hand is taken in
marriage. Her sire and brothers and father-in-law and husband's brothers
should show her every respect and adorn her with ornaments, if they be
desirous of reaping benefits, for such conduct on their part always leads
to considerable happiness and advantage. If the wife does not like her
husband or fails to gladden him, from such dislike and absence of joy,
the husband can never have issue for increasing his race. Women, O king,
should always be worshipped and treated with affection. There where women
are treated with respect, the very deities are said to be filled with
joy. There where women are not worshipped, all acts become fruitless. If
the women of a family, in consequence of the treatment they receive,
grieve and shed tears, that family soon becomes extinct. Those houses
that are cursed by women meet with destruction and ruin as if scorched by
some Atharvan rite. Such houses lose their splendour. Their growth and
prosperity cease. O king, Mann, on the eve of his departure for Heaven,
made over women to the care and protection of men, saying that they are
weak, that they fall an easy prey to the seductive wiles of men,[294]
disposed to accept the love that is offered them, and devoted to truth.
There are others among them that are full of malice, covetous of honours,
fierce in disposition, unlovable, and impervious to reason. Women,
however, deserve to be honoured. Do ye men show them honour. The
righteousness of men depends upon women. All pleasures and enjoyments
also completely depend upon them. Do ye serve them and worship them. Do
ye bend your wills before them. The begetting of offspring, the nursing
of children already born, and the accomplishment of all acts necessary
for the needs of society, behold, all these have women for their cause.
By honouring women, ye are sure to attain to the fruition of all objects.
In this connection a princess of the house of Janaka the ruler of the
Videhas, sang a verse. It is this: Women have no sacrifices ordained for
them. There are no Sraddhas which they are called upon to perform. They
are not required to observe any facts. To serve their husbands with
reverence and willing obedience is their only duty. Through the discharge
of that duty they succeed in conquering heaven. In childhood, the sire
protects her. The husband protects her in youth. When she becomes old,
her sons, protect her. At no period of her life does woman deserve to be
free. Deities of prosperity are women. The person that desire affluence
and prosperity should honour them. By cherishing women, O Bharata, one
cherishes the goddess of prosperity herself, and by afflicting her, one
is said to afflict the goddess of prosperity.'"



SECTION XLVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou art fully conversant with the ordinances of all
the scriptures. Thou art the foremost of those that are acquainted with
the duties of kings. Thou art celebrated over the whole world as a great
dispeller of doubts. I have a doubt, do thou explain it to me, O
grandsire! As regards this doubt that has arisen in my mind, I shall not
ask any other person for its solution. It behoveth thee, O thou of mighty
arms, to expound as to how a man should conduct himself who is desirous
of treading along the path of duty and righteousness. It has been laid
down, O grandsire, that a Brahmana can take four wives, viz., one that
belongs to his own order, one that is a Kshatriya, one that is a Vaisya,
and one that is a Sudra, if the Brahmana wishes to indulge in the desire
of sexual intercourse. Tell me, O best of the Kurus, which amongst those
sons deserves to inherit the father's wealth one after another? Who
amongst them, O grandsire, shall take what share of the paternal wealth?
I desire to hear this, viz., how the distribution has been ordained
amongst them of the paternal property.'

"Bhishma said, 'The Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and the Vaisya are regarded
as the three regenerate orders. To wed in these three orders has been
ordained to be the duty of the Brahmana, O Yudhishthira. Through
erroneous judgment or cupidity or lust, O scorcher of foes, a Brahmana
takes a Sudra wife. Such a wife, however, he is not competent to take
according to the scriptures. A Brahmana, by taking a Sudra woman to his
bed, attains to a low end in the next world. He should, having done such
an act, undergo expiation according to the rites laid down in the
scriptures. That expiation must be twice heavier or severer if in
consequence of such an act, O Yudhishthira, the Brahmana gets offspring.
I shall now tell thee, O Bharata, how the (paternal) wealth is to be
distributed (among the children of the different spouses.) The son born
of the Brahmana wife shall, in the first place, appropriate from his
father's wealth a bull of good marks, and the best car or vehicle. What
remains of the Brahmana's property, O Yudhishthira, after this should be
divided into ten equal portions. The son by the Brahmana wife shall take
four of such portions of the paternal wealth. The son that is born of the
Kshatriya wife is, without doubt, possessed of the status of a Brahmana.
In consequence, however, of the distinction attaching to his mother, he
shall take three of the ten shares into which the property has been
divided. The son that has been born of the wife belonging to the third
order, viz., the woman of the Vaisya caste, by the Brahmana sire, shall
take, O Yudhishthira, two of the three remaining shares of the father's
property. It has been said that the son that has been begotten by the
Brahmana sire upon the Sudra wife should not take any portion of the
father's wealth, for he is not to be considered an heir. A little,
however, of the paternal wealth should be given to the son of the Sudra
wife, hence the one remaining share should be given to him out of
compassion. Even this should be the order of the ten shares into which
the Brahmana's wealth is to be divided. All the sons that are born of the
same mother or of mothers of the same order, shall share equally the
portion that is theirs. The son born of the Sudra wife should not be
regarded as invested with the status of a Brahmana in consequence of his
being unskilled (in the scriptures and the duties ordained for the
Brahmana). Only those children that are born of wives belonging to the
three higher orders should be regarded as invested with the status of
Brahmanas. It has been said that there are only four orders there is no
fifth that has been enumerated. The son by the Sudra wife shall take the
tenth part of his sire's wealth (that remains after the allotment has
been made to the others in the way spoken of). That share, however, he is
to take only when his sire has given it to him. He shall not take it if
his sire does not give it unto him. Some portion of the sire's wealth
should without doubt, be given, O Bharata, to the son of the Sudra wife.
Compassion is one of the highest virtues. It is through compassion that
something is given to the son of the Sudra wife. Whatever be the object
in respect of which compassion arises, as a cardinal virtue it is always
productive of merit. Whether the sire happens to have children (by his
spouses belonging to the other orders) or to have no children (by such
spouses), unto the son by the Sudra wife, O Bharata, nothing more than a
tenth part of the sire's wealth should be given. If a Brahmana happens to
have more wealth than what is necessary for maintaining himself and his
family for three years, he should with that wealth perform sacrifices. A
Brahmana should never acquire wealth for nothing.[295] The highest sum
that the husband should give unto the wife is three thousand coins (of
the prevailing currency). The wealth that the husband gives unto the
wife, the latter may spend or dispose of as she likes. Upon the death of
the childless husband, the wife shall enjoy all his wealth. (She shall
not, however, sell or otherwise dispose of any portion of it). The wife
should never take (without her husband's knowledge) any portion of her
husband's wealth. Whatever wealth, O Yudhishthira, the Brahmana wife may
acquire by gift from her father, should be taken (after her death) by her
daughter, for the daughter is like the son. The daughter, O king, has
been ordained in the scriptures, to be equal to the son, O delighter of
the Kurus. Even thus hath the law of inheritance been ordained, O bull of
Bharata's race. Remembering these ordinances about the distribution and
disposal of wealth, one should never acquire wealth uselessly.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'If the son born of a Sudra woman by a Brahmana
father has been declared in the scriptures to be disentitled to any
wealth, by what exceptional rule then is a tenth part of the paternal
property to be given to him? A son born of a Brahmana wife by a Brahmana
is unquestionably a Brahmana. One born of a Kshatriya wife or of a Vaisya
wife, by a Brahmana husband, is similarly invested with the status of a
Brahmana. Why then, O best of kings, are such sons to share the paternal
wealth unequally? All of them, thou hast said, are Brahmanas, having been
born of mothers that belong to the three higher orders equally entitled
to the name of regenerate.'

"Bhishma said, 'O scorcher of foes, all spouses in this world are called
by the name of Data. Although that name is applied to all, yet there is
this great distinction to be observed. If, having married three wives
belonging to the three other orders, a Brahmana takes a Brahmana wife the
very last of all yet shall she be regarded as the first in rank among all
the wives, and as deserving of the greatest respect. Indeed, among all
the co-wives, she shall be the foremost in consideration. In her
apartments should be kept all those articles that are necessary in view
of the husband's baths, personal decorations, washing of teeth, and
application of collyrium to the eyes. In her apartments should be kept
the Havya and the Kavya and all else that the husband may require for the
performance of his religious acts. If the Brahmana wife is in the house,
no other wife is entitled to attend to these needs of the husband. Only
the Brahmana wife, O Yudhishthira, should assist in these acts of the
husband. The husband's food and drink and garlands and robes and
ornaments, all these should be given by the Brahmana wife to the husband,
for she is the foremost in rank and consideration among all the spouses
of the husband. These are the ordinances of the scriptures as laid down
by Manu, O delighter of the Kurus! Even this, O monarch, is seen to be
the course of eternal usage. If a Brahmana, O Yudhishthira, led by lust,
acts in a different way, he shall come to be regarded as a Chandala among
Brahmanas.[296] The son born of the Kshatriya wife has been said to be
equal in status to the son born of the Brahmana wife. For all that, a
distinction attaches to the son of the Brahmana wife in consequence of
the superiority of the Brahmana to the Kshatriya in respect of the order
of birth. The Kshatriya cannot be regarded as equal to the Brahmana woman
in point of birth. Hence, O best of kings, the son born of the Brahmana
wife must be regarded as the first in rank and superior to the son born
of the Kshatriya wife. Because, again the Kshatriya is not equal in point
of birth to the Brahmana wife, hence the son of the Brahmana wife takes
one after another, all the best things, O Yudhishthira, among his
father's possessions. Similarly, the Vaisya cannot be regarded as the
equal of the Kshatriya in point of birth. Prosperity, kingdom, and
treasury, O Yudhishthira, belong to the Kshatriya. All these have been
ordained for the Kshatriya. The whole earth, O king, with her belt of
seas, is seen to belong to him. By following the duties of his own order,
the Kshatriya acquires an extensive affluence. The sceptre of royalty is
held by him. Without the Kshatriya, O king, there can be no protection.
The Brahmanas are highly blessed, for they are the deities of the very
deities. Following the ordinances laid down by the Rishis, the Kshatriyas
should worship the Brahmanas according to due rites. Even this is the
eternal usage. Coveted by thieves and others, the possessions of all men
are protected by Kshatriyas in the observance of the duties assigned to
their order. Indeed, wealth and spouses and every other possession owned
by people would have been forcibly taken away but for this protection
that the Kshatriyas afford. The Kshatriya, as the king, becomes the
protector or rescuer of all the others. Hence, the son of the Kshatriya
wife shall, without doubt, be held to be superior to him that is born of
the Vaisya wife. The son of the Kshatriya wife, for this, takes a larger
share of the paternal property than the son of the Vaisya mother.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast duly said what the rules are that apply to
Brahmanas. What, however, are the rules that apply to the others?'

"Bhishma said, 'For the Kshatriya, O delighter of the Kurus, two wives
have been ordained. The Kshatriya may take a third wife from the Sudra
order. Such practice prevails, it is true, but it is not sanctioned by
the scriptures. Even this should be the order, O Yudhisthira, of the
spouses of a Kshatriya. The property of a Kshatriya should, O king, be
divided into eight shares. The son of the Kshatriya wife shall take four
of such shares of the paternal property. The son of the Vaisya wife shall
take three of such shares. The remaining one or the eighth share shall be
taken by the son of the Sudra wife. The son of the Sudra wife, however,
shall take only when the father gives but not otherwise. For the Vaisya
only one wife has been ordained. A second wife is taken from the Sudra
order. The practice prevails, it is true, but it is not sanctioned by the
scriptures. If a Vaisya has two wives, one of whom is a Vaisya and the
other a Sudra, there is a difference between them in respect of status.
The wealth of a Vaisya, O chief of Bharata's race, should be divided Into
five portions. I shall now speak of the sons of a Vaisya by a wife of his
own order and by one belonging to the inferior order, as also of the
manner in which, O king his wealth is to be distributed among those
children. The son born of the Vaisya wife shall take four of such shares
of his father's wealth. The fifth share, O Bharata, has been said to
belong to the son born of the Sudra wife. Such a son, however, shall take
when the father gives. He should not take anything unless the father
gives it to him. The son that is begotten on a Sudra wife by persons of
the three higher orders should always be regarded as disentitled to any
share of the sire's wealth. The Sudra should have only one wife taken
from his own order. He can under no circumstances, take any other spouse.
Even if he happens to have a century of sons by such a spouse, all of
them share equally the wealth that he may leave behind. As regards all
the orders, the children born of the spouse taken from the husband's own
order shall, it has been laid down, share equally the father's wealth.
The eldest son's share shall be greater than that of every other son, for
he shall take one share more than each of his brothers, consisting of the
best things of his father. Even this is the law of inheritance, O son of
Pritha, as declared by the Self-born himself. Amongst children all born
of the spouse taken from the husband's own order, there is another
distinction, O king! In marrying, the elder ones should always precede
the younger ones. The spouses being all equal in respect of their order
of birth, and the children also being all equal in respect of the status
of their mothers, the son that is first-born shall take one share more
than each of his other brothers. The son that comes next in point of age
shall take a share that is next in value, while the son that is youngest
shall take the share that belongs to the youngest.[297] Thus among
spouses of all orders, they that belong to the same order with the
husband are regarded as the first. Even this is what was declared by the
great Rishi Kasyapa the son of Marichi.'



SECTION XLVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Through inducements offered by wealth, or through
mere lust, or through ignorance of the true order of birth (of both males
and females), or through folly, intermixture happens of the several order
What, O grandsire, are the duties of persons that are born in the mixed
classes and what are the acts laid down for them? Do thou discourse to me
on this!'

"Bhishma said, 'In the beginning, the Lord of all creatures created the
four orders and laid down their respective acts or duties, for the sake
of sacrifice.[298] The Brahmana may take four wives, one from each of the
four orders. In two of them (viz., the wife taken from his own order and
that taken from the one next below), he takes birth himself (the children
begotten upon them being regarded as invested with the same status as his
own). Those sons, however, that are begotten by him on the two spouses
that belong to the next two orders (viz., Vaisya and Sudra), are
inferior, their status being determined not by that of their father but
by that of their mothers. The son that is begotten by a Brahmana upon a
Sudra wife is called Parasara, implying one born of a corpse, for the
Sudra woman's body is as inauspicious as a corpse. He should serve the
persons of his (father's) race. Indeed, it is not proper for him to give
up the duty of service that has been laid down for him. Adopting all
means in his power, he should uphold the burden of his family. Even if he
happens to be elder in age, he should still dutifully serve the other
children of his father who may be younger to him in years, and bestow
upon them whatever he may succeed in earning. A Kshatriya may take three
wives. In two of them (viz., the one taken from his own order and the
other that is taken from the order immediately below), he takes birth
himself (so that those children are invested with the status of his own
order). His third wife being of the Sudra order is regarded as very
inferior. The son that he begets upon her comes to be called as an Ugra.
The Vaisya may take two spouses. In both of them (viz., the one taken
from his own order, and the other from the lowest of the four pure
orders), he takes birth himself (so that those children become invested
with the status of his own order). The Sudra can take only one wife,
viz., she that is taken from his own order. The son begotten by him upon
her becomes a Sudra. A son that takes birth under circumstances other
than those mentioned above, comes to be looked upon as a very inferior
one If a person of a lower order begets a son upon a woman of a superior
order, such a son is regarded as outside the pale of the four pure
orders. Indeed, such a son becomes on object of censure with the four
principal orders. If a Kshatriya begets a son upon a Brahmana woman, such
a son, without being included in any of the four pure orders, comes to be
regarded as a Suta The duties of a Suta are all connected with the
reciting of eulogies and encomiums of kings and other great men. The son
begotten by a Vaisya upon a woman of the Brahmana order comes to be
regarded as a Vaidehaka. The duties assigned to him are the charge of
bars and bolts for protecting the privacy of women of respectable
households. Such sons have no cleansing rites laid down for them.[299] If
a Sudra unites with a woman belonging to the foremost of the four orders,
the son that is begotten is called a Chandala. Endued with a fierce
disposition, he must live in the outskirts of cities and towns and the
duty assigned to him is that of the public executioner. Such sons are
always regarded as wretches of their race. These, O foremost of
intelligent persons, are the offspring of intermixed orders. The son
begotten by a Vaisya upon a Kshatriya woman becomes a Vandi or Magadha.
The duties assigned to him are eloquent recitations of praise. The son
begotten through transgression, by a Sudra upon a Kshatriya women,
becomes a Nishada and the duties assigned to him have reference to the
catching of fish. If a Sudra happens to have intercourse with a Vaisya
woman, the son begotten upon her comes to be called Ayogava. The duty
assigned to such a person are those of a Takshan (carpenter). They that
are Brahmanas should never accept gifts from such a person. They are not
entitled to possess any kind of wealth. Persons belonging to the mixed
castes beget upon spouses taken from their own castes children invested
with the status that is their own. When they beget children in women
taken from castes that are inferior to theirs, such children become
inferior to their fathers, for they become invested with the status that
belongs to their mothers Thus as regards the four pure orders, persons
beget children invested with their own status upon spouses taken from
their own orders as also upon them that are taken from the orders
immediately below their own. When, however, offspring are begotten upon
other spouses, they come to be regarded as invested with a status that
is, principally, outside the pale of the four pure orders. When such
children beget sons in women taken from their own classes, those sons
take the status of their sires. It is only when they take spouse from
castes other than their own, that the children they beget become invested
with inferior status. As an example of this it may be said that a Sudra
begets upon a woman belonging to the most superior order a son that is
outside the pale of the four orders (for such a son comes to be regarded
as a Chandala who is much inferior). The son that is outside the pale of
the four orders by uniting with women belonging to the four principal
orders, begets offspring that are further degraded in point of status.
From those outside the pale of the four orders and those again that are
further outside that pale, children multiply in consequence of the union
of persons with women of classes superior to their own. In this way, from
persons of inferior status classes spring up, altogether fifteen in
number, that are equally low or still lower in status. It is only from
sexual union of women with persons who should not have such union with
them that mixed classes spring up. Among the classes that are thus
outside the pale of the four principal or pure orders, children are
begotten upon women belonging to the class called Sairindhri by men of
the class called Magadha. The occupation of such offspring is the
adornment of the bodies of kinds and others. They are well-acquainted
with the preparation of unguents, the making of wreaths, and the
manufacture of articles used for the decoration of the person. Though
free by the status that attaches to them by birth, they should yet lead a
life of service. From the union of Magadhas of a certain class with women
of the caste called Sairindhri, there springs up another caste called
Ayogava. Their occupation consists in the making of nets (for catching
fish and fowl and animals of the chase). Vaidehas, by uniting themselves
with women of the Sairindhri caste, beget children called Maireyakas
whose occupation consists in the manufacture of wines and spirits. From
the Nishadas spring a caste called Madgura and another known by the name
of Dasas whose occupation consists in plying boats. From the Chandala
springs a race called Swapaka whose occupation consists in keeping guard
over the dead. The women of the Magadhi caste, by union with these four
castes of wicked dispositions produce four others who live by practising
deceit. These are Mansa, Swadukara, Kshaudra, and Saugandha. From the
Vaideha springs up a cruel and sinful caste that lives by practising
deception. From the Nishadas again springs up the Madranabha caste whose
members are seen to ride on cars drawn by asses. From the Chandalas
springs up the caste called Pukkasa whose members are seen to eat the
flesh of asses, horses and elephants. These cover themselves with the
garments obtained by stripping human corpses. They are again seen to eat
from broken earthenware[300]. These three castes of very low status are
born of women of the Ayogava caste (by fathers taken from different
castes). The caste called Kshudra springs from the Vaidehaka. The caste
called Andhra which takes up its residence in the outskirts of towns and
cities, also springs up (from the Vaidehakas). Then again the Charmakara,
uniting himself with a woman of Nishada caste, begets the class called
Karavara. From the Chandala again springs up the caste known by the name
of Pandusaupaka whose occupation consists in making baskets and other
things with cleft bamboos. From the union of the Nishada with a woman of
the Vaidehi caste springs one who is called by the name of Ahindaka. The
Chandala begets upon a Saupaka woman, a son that does not differ from the
Chandala in status or occupation. A Nishada woman, by union with a
Chandala, brings forth a son who lives in the outskirts of villages and
towns. Indeed, the members of such a caste live in crematoria and are
regarded by the very lowest orders as incapable of being numbered among
them. Thus to these mixed castes spring up from improper and sinful union
of fathers and mothers belonging to different castes. Whether they live
in concealment or openly, they should be known by their occupations. The
duties have been laid down in the scriptures for only the four principal
orders. As regards the others the scriptures are entirely silent. Among
all the orders, the members of those castes that have no duties assigned
to them by the scriptures, need have no fears as to what they do (to earn
their livelihood). Persons unaccustomed to the performance or for whom
sacrifices have not been laid down, and who are deprived of the company
and the instructions of the righteous whether numbered among the four
principal orders or out of their pale, by uniting themselves with women
of other castes, led not by considerations of righteousness but by
uncontrolled lust, cause numerous mixed castes to come into existence
whose occupations and abodes depend on the circumstances connected with
the irregular unions to which they owe their origin. Having recourse to
spots where four roads meet, or crematoria, or hills and mountains, or
forests and trees, they build their habitations there. The ornaments they
wear are made of iron. Living in such places openly, they betake
themselves to their own occupations to earn their livelihood. They may be
seen to live in this way, adorning their persons with ornaments and
employed in the task of manufacturing diverse kinds of domestic and other
utensils. Without doubt, by assisting kine and Brahmanas, and practising
the virtues of abstention from cruelty, compassion, truthfulness of
speech, and forgiveness, and, if need be, by preserving others by laying
down their very lives, persons of the mixed castes may achieve success. I
have no doubt, O chief of men, that these virtues become the causes of
their success. He that is possessed of intelligence, should, taking
everything into consideration, beget offspring according to the
ordinances of the scriptures, upon woman that have been declared proper
or fit for him. A son begotten upon a women belonging to a degraded
caste, instead of rescuing the sire, brings him to grief even as a heavy
weight brings to grief a swimmer desirous of crossing water. Whether a
man happens to be possessed of learning or not, lust and wrath are
natural attributes of humanity in this world. Women, therefore, may
always be seen to drag men into the wrong path. This natural disposition
of women is such that man's contact with her is productive of misery to
him. Hence, men possessed of wisdom do not suffer themselves to be
excessively attached to women.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'There are men who belong to the mixed castes, and
who are of very impure birth. Though presenting the features of
respectability, they are in reality disrespectable. In consequence of
these external aspects we may not be able to know the truth about their
birth. Are there any signs, O grandsire, by which the truth may be known
about the origin of such men?"



SECTION XLIX

"Bhishma said, 'A person that is born of an irregular union presents
diverse features of disposition. One's purity of birth, again, is to be
ascertained from one's acts which must resemble the acts of those who are
admittedly good and righteous. A disrespectable behaviour, acts opposed
to those laid down in the scriptures, crookedness and cruelty, and
abstention from sacrifices and other spiritual acts that lead to merit,
proclaim one's impurity of origin. A son receives the disposition of
either the sire or the mother. Sometimes he catches the dispositions of
both. A person of impure birth can never succeed in concealing his true
disposition. As the cub of a tiger or a leopard resembles its sire and
dam in form and in (the matter of) its stripes of spots, even so a person
cannot but betray the circumstance of his origin. However covered may the
course of one's descent be, if that descent happens to be impure, its
character or disposition is sure to manifest itself slightly or largely.
A person may, for purposes of his own, choose to tread on an insincere
path, displaying such conduct as seems to be righteous. His own
disposition, however, in the matter of those acts that he does, always
proclaims whether he belongs to a good order or to a different one.
Creatures in the world are endued with diverse kinds of disposition. They
are, again, seen to be employed in diverse kinds of acts. Amongst
creatures thus employed, there is nothing that is so good or precious as
pure birth and righteous conduct. If a person be born in a low order,
that good understanding which arises from a study of the scriptures fails
to rescue his body from low acts. Absolute goodness of understanding may
be of different degrees. It may be high, middling, or low. Even if it
appears in a person of low extraction, it disappears like autumnal clouds
without producing any consequences. On the other hand, that other
goodness of understanding which, according to its measure, has ordained
the status in which the person has been born, shows itself in his
acts[301]. If a person happens to belong to a superior order but still if
he happens to be divested of good behaviour, he should receive no respect
or worship. One may worship even a Sudra if he happens to be conversant
with duties and be of good conduct. A person proclaims himself by his own
good and acts and by his good or bad disposition and birth. If one's race
of birth happens to be degraded for any reason, one soon raises it and
makes it resplendent and famous by one's acts. For these reasons they
that are endued with wisdom should avoid those women, among these diverse
castes mixed or pure, upon whom they should not beget offspring.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou discourse to us, O sire, upon the orders and
classes separately, upon different kinds of sons begotten upon different
types of women, upon the person entitled to have them as sons, and upon
their status in life. It is known that disputes frequently arise with
respect to sons. It behoveth thee, O king, to solve the doubts that have
taken possession of our minds. Indeed, we are stupefied with respect to
this subject.'

"Bhishma said, 'The son of one's loins is regarded as one's own self. The
son that is begotten upon one's wife by a person whom one has invited for
the task, is called Niruktaja. The son that is begotten upon one's wife
by somebody without one's permission, is Prasritaja. The son begotten
upon his own wife by a person fallen away from his status is called
Patitaja. There are two other sons, viz., the son given, and the son
made. There is another called Adhyudha.[302] The son born of a maiden in
her father's house is called Kanina. Besides these, there are six kinds
of sons called Apadhwansaja and six others that are Apasadas. These are
the several kinds of sons mentioned in the scriptures, learn, O Bharata!

"Yudhishthira said, 'Who are the six that are called Apadhwansajas? Who
also are the Apasadas? It behoveth thee to explain all these to me in
detail.'

"Bhishma said, 'The sons that a Brahmana begets upon spouses taken from
the three inferior orders, those begotten by a Kshatriya upon spouses
taken from the two orders inferior to his own, O Bharata, and the sons
that a Vaisya begets upon a spouse taken from the one order that is
inferior to his,--are all called Apadhwansajas. They are, as thus
explained, of six kinds. Listen now to me as I tell thee who the
Apasadas, are. The son that a Sudra begets upon a Brahmana woman is
called a Chandala. Begotten upon a Kshatriya woman by a person of the
Sudra order, the son is called a Vratya. He who is born of a Vaisya woman
by a Sudra father is called a Vaidya. These three kinds of sons are
called Apasadas. The Vaisya, by uniting himself with a woman of the
Brahmana order, begets a son that is called a Magadha, while the son that
he gets upon a Kshatriya woman is called a Vamaka. The Kshatriya can
beget but one kind of son upon a woman of a superior order. Indeed, the
son begotten by a Kshatriya upon a Brahmana woman, is called a Suta.
These three also are called Apasadas. It cannot be said, O king, that
these six kinds of sons are no sons.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Some say that one's son is he that is born in one's
soil. Some, on the other hand, say that one's son is he who has been
begotten from one's seed. Are both these kinds of sons equal? Whore,
again, is the son to be? Do thou tell me this, O grandsire!

"Bhishma said, 'His is the son from whose seed he has sprung. If,
however, the owner of the seed abandons the son born of it, such a son
then becomes his upon whose spouse he has been begotten. The same rule
applies to the son called Adhyudha. He belongs to the person from whose
seed he has taken his birth. If, however, the owner of the seed abandons
him, he becomes the son of the husband of his mother.[303] Know that even
this is what the law declares.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'We know that the son becomes his from whose seed he
has taken birth. Whence does the husband of the woman that brings forth
the son derive his right to the latter? Similarly, the son called
Adhyudha should be known to be the son of him from whose seed he has
sprung. How can they be sons of others by reasons of the engagement about
owning and rearing them having been broken?'

"Bhishma said, 'He who having begotten a son of his own loins, abandons
him for some reason or other, cannot be regarded as the sire of such a
son, for vital seed only cannot create sonship. Such a son must be held
to belong to the person who owns the soil. When a man, desiring to have a
son, weds a girl quick with child, the son born of his spouse must belong
to him, for it is the fruit of his own soil. The person from whose vital
seed the son has sprung can have no right to such a son. The son that is
born in one's soil but not begotten by the owner, O chief of Bharata's
race, bears all the marks of the sire that has actually begotten him (and
not the marks of one that is only the husband of his mother). The son
thus born is incapable of concealing the evidences that physiognomy
offers. He is at once known by eyesight (to belong to another).[304] As
regards the son made, he is sometimes regarded as the child of the person
who has made him a son and so brings him up. In his case, neither the
vital seed of which he is born nor the soil in which he is born, becomes
the cause of sonship.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What kind of a son is that who is said to be a made
son and whose sonship arises from the fact of his being taken and brought
up and in whose case neither the vital seed nor the soil of birth, O
Bharata, is regarded as the cause of sonship?'

"Bhishma said, 'When a person takes up and rears a son that has been cast
off on the road by his father and mother, and when the person thus taking
and rearing him fails to find out his parents after search, he becomes
the father of such a son and the latter becomes what is called his made
son. Not having anybody to own him, he becomes owned by him who brings
him up. Such a son, again, comes to be regarded as belonging to that
order to which his owner or rearer belongs.'

"Yudhishthira said, How should the purificatory rites of such a person be
performed? In whose case what sort of rites are to be performed? With
what girl should he be wedded? Do thou tell me all this, O grandsire!"

"Bhishma said, 'The rites of purification touching such a son should be
performed conformably to the usage of the person himself that raises him,
for, cast off by his parents, such a son obtains the order of the person
that takes him and brings him up. Indeed, O thou of unfading glory, the
rearer should perform all the purificatory rites with respect to such a
son according to the practices of the rearer's own race and kinsmen. As
regards the girl also, O Yudhishthira, that should be bestowed in
marriage upon such a son, who belongs to the order of the rearer himself,
All this is to be done only when the order of son's true mother cannot be
ascertained. Among sons, he that is born of a maiden and he that is born
of a mother that had conceived before her marriage but had brought him
fourth subsequent to that are regarded as very disgraceful and degraded.
Even those two, however, should receive the same rites of purification
that are laid down for the sons begotten by the father in lawful wedlock.
With respect to the son that becomes his sire's in consequence of his
birth in the sire's soil and of those sons that are called Apasadas and,
those conceived by the spouse in her maidenhood but brought forth after
marriage, Brahmanas and others should apply the same rites of
purification that hold good for their own orders. These are the
conclusions that are to be found in the scriptures with respect to the
different orders. I have thus told thee everything appertaining to thy
questions. What else dost thou wish to hear?"



SECTION L

"Yudhishthira said, 'What is the nature of the compassion or pity that is
felt at the sight of another's woe? What is the nature of that compassion
or sympathy that one feels for another in consequence of one's living in
the companionship of that other? What is the nature (and degree) of the
high blessedness that attaches to kine? It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to
expound all this to me.'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, O thou of great effulgence,
recite to thee an ancient narrative of a conversation between Nahusha and
the Rishi Chyavana. In days of yore O Chief of Bharata's race, the great
Rishi Chyavana of Bhrigu's race, always observant of high vows, became
desirous of leading for some time the mode of life called Udavasa and set
himself to commence it. Casting off pride and wrath and joy and grief,
the ascetic, pledging himself to observe that vow, set himself to live
for twelve years according to the rules of Udavasa. The Rishi inspired
all creatures with a happy trust. And he inspired similar confidence in
all creatures living in water. The puissant ascetic resembled the Moon
himself in his behaviour to all. Bowing unto all the deities and having
cleansed himself of all sins, he entered the water at the confluence of
the Ganga and the Yamuna, and stood there like an inanimate post of wood.
Placing his head against it, he bore the fierce and roaring current of
the two streams united together,--the current whose speed resembled that
of the wind itself. The Ganga and the Yamuna, however, and the other
streams and lakes, whose waters unite together at the confluence at
Prayaga, instead of afflicting the Rishi, went past him (to show him
respect). Assuming the attitude of a wooden post, the great Muni
sometimes laid himself down in the water and slept at ease. And
sometimes, O chief of Bharata's race, the intelligent sage stood in an
erect posture. He became quite agreeable unto all creatures living in
water. Without the least fear, all these used to smell the Rishi's lips.
In this way, the Rishi passed a long time at that grand confluence of
waters. One day some fishermen came there. With nets in their hands, O
thou of great effulgence, those men came to that spot where the Rishi
was. They were many in number and all of them were bent upon catching
fish. Well-formed and broad-chested, endued with great strength and
courage and never returning in fear from water, those men who lived upon
the earnings by their nets, came to that spot, resolved to catch fish.
Arrived at the water which contained many fish, those fishermen, O chief
of the Bharatas, tied all their nets together. Desirous of fish, those
Kaivartas, many in number united together and surrounded a portion of the
waters of the Ganga and the Yamuna with their nets. Indeed, they then
cast into water their net which was made of new strings, capable of
covering a large space, and endued with sufficient length and breadth.
All of them, getting into the water, then began to drag with great force
that net of theirs which was very large and had been well-spread over a
large space. All of them were free from fear, cheerful, and fully
resolved to do one another's bidding. They had succeeded in enmeshing a
large number of fish and other aquatic animals. And as they dragged their
net, O king, they easily dragged up Chyavana the son of Bhrigu along with
a large number of fish. His body was overgrown with the river moss. His
beard and matted locks had become green. And all over his person could be
seen conchs and other molluscs attached with their heads. Beholding that
Rishi who was well-conversant with the Vedas dragged up by them from
water, all the fishermen stood with joined palms and then prostrated
themselves on the ground and repeatedly bent their heads. Through fear
and pain caused by the dragging of the net, and in consequence of their
being brought upon land, the fish enmeshed in the net yielded up their
lives. The ascetic, beholding that great slaughter of fishes, became
filled with compassion and sighed repeatedly.'

"The fishermen said, 'We have committed this sin (of dragging thy sacred
self from water) through ignorance. Be gratified with us! What wish of
thine shall we accomplish? Command us, O great ascetic!'

"Bhishma continued, 'This addressed by them, Chyauana, from among that
heap of fishes around him, said, 'Do ye with concentrated attention hear
what my most cherished wish is. I shall either die with these fishes or
do ye sell me with them. I have lived with them for a long time within
the water. I do not wish to abandon them at such a time.' When he said
these words unto them, the fishermen became exceedingly terrified. With
pale faces they repaired to king Nahusha and informed him of all that had
taken place.'"



SECTION LI

"Bhishma said, 'King Nahusha hearing the pass to which Chyavana was
reduced, quickly proceeded to that spot accompanied by his ministers and
priest. Having cleansed himself duly, the king, with joined palms and
concentrated attention, introduced himself unto the high-souled Chyavana.
The king's priest then worshipped with due ceremonies that Rishi, O
monarch, who was observant of the vow of truth and endued with a high
soul, and who resembled a god himself (in splendour and energy).'

"Nahusha said, 'Tell me, O best of regenerate persons, what act shall we
do that may be agreeable to thee? However difficult that act may be,
there is nothing, O holy one, that I shall not be able to accomplish at
thy bidding.'

"Chyavana said, 'These men that live by catching fish have all been tried
with labour. Do thou pay them the price that may be set upon me along
with the value of these fish.'

"Nahusha said, 'Let my priest give unto these Nishadas a thousand coins
as a price for purchasing these sacred one as he himself has commanded.'

"Chyavana said, 'A thousand coins cannot represent my price. The question
depends upon your discretion. Give them a fair value, settling with thy
own intelligence what it should be.'

"Nahusha said, 'Let, O learned Brahmana, a hundred thousand coins be
given unto these Nishadas. Shall this be thy price, O holy one, or dost
think otherwise?'

"Chyavana said, 'I should not be purchased for a hundred thousand coins,
O best of monarchs! Let a proper price be given unto them. Do thou
consult with thy ministers.'

"Nahusha said, 'Let my priest give unto these Nishadas a crore of coins.
If even this does not represent thy price, let more be paid unto them.'

"Chyavana said, 'O king, I do not deserve to be purchased for a crore of
coins or even more. Let that price be given unto those men which would be
fair or proper. Do thou 'consult with the Brahmanas.'

"Nahusha said, 'Let half of my kingdom or even the whole be given away
unto these Nishadas. I think that would represent thy price. What,
however, dost thou think, O regenerate one?'

"Chyavana said, 'I do not deserve to be purchased with half thy kingdom
or even the whole of it, O king! Let thy price which is proper be given
unto these men. Do thou consult with the Rishis.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the great Rishi, Nahusha
became afflicted with great grief. With his ministers and priest he began
to deliberate on the matter. There then came unto king Nahusha an ascetic
living in the woods and subsisting upon fruit and roots and born of a
cow. That best of regenerate persons, addressing the monarch, O king,
said these words, 'I shall soon gratify thee. The Rishi also will be
gratified. I shall never speak an untruth.--no, not even in jest, what
then need I say of other occasions? Thou shouldst, without any scruple,
do what I bid thee.'

"Nahusha said, 'Do thou, O illustrious one, say what the price is of that
great Rishi of Bhrigu's race. O, save me from this terrible pass, save my
kingdom, and save my race! If the holy Chyavana became angry, he would
destroy the three worlds: what need I say them of my poor self who is
destitute of penances and who depends only upon the might of his arm? O
great Rishi, do thou become the raft unto us that have all fallen into a
fathomless ocean with all our counsellors and our priest! Do thou settle
what the price should be of the Rishi.'

"Bhishma said, 'Hearing these words of Nahusha, the ascetic born of a cow
and endued with great energy spoke in this strain, gladdening the monarch
and all his counsellors, 'Brahmanas, O king, belong to the foremost of
the four orders. No value, however great, can be set upon them. Cows also
are invaluable. Therefore, O chief of men, do thou regard a cow as the
value of the Rishi.' Hearing these words of the great Rishi, Nahusha
became, O king, filled with joy along with all his counsellors and
priest. Proceeding then to the presence of Bhrigu's son, Chyavana, of
rigid vows, h e addressed him thus, O monarch, for gratifying him to the
best of his ability.'

'Nahusha said, 'Rise, rise, O regenerate Rishi, thou hast been purchased.
O son of Bhirgu, with a cow as thy price. O foremost of righteous
persons, even this, I think, is thy price.'

"Chyavana said. 'Yes, O king of kings, I do rise up. I have been properly
purchased by thee, O sinless one! I do not, O thou of unfading glory, see
any wealth that is equal to kine. To speak of kine, to hear others speak
of them, to make gifts of kine, and to see kine, O king, are acts that
are all applauded, O hero, and that are highly auspicious and
sin-cleansing. Kine are always the root of prosperity. There is no fault
in kine. Kine always afford the best food, in the form of Havi, unto the
deities. The sacred Mantras, Swaha and Vashat, are always established
upon kine. Kine are the chief conductresses of sacrifices. They
constitute the mouth of sacrifice. They bear and yield excellent and
strength-giving nectar. They receive the worship of all the worlds and
are regarded as the source of nectar. On earth, kine resemble fire in
energy and form. Verily, kine represent high energy, and are bestowers of
great happiness upon all creatures. That country where kine, established
by their owners, breathe fearlessly, shines in beauty. The sins, also of
that country are all washed off. Kine constitute the stairs that lead to
heaven. Kine are adorned in heaven itself. Kine are goddesses that are
competent to give everything and grant every wish. There is nothing else
in the world that is so high or so superior!'[305]

"Bhishma continued, "Even this is what I say unto thee on the subject of
the glory and superiority of kine, O chief of Bharata's race. I am
competent to proclaim a part only of the merits that attach to kine. I
have not the ability to exhaust the subject!'

"Then Nishadas said, 'O ascetic, thou hast seen us and hast also spoken
with us. It has been said that friendship with those that are good,
depends upon only seven words[306]. Do thou then, O lord, show us thy
grace. The blazing sacrificial fire eats all the oblations of clarified
butter poured upon it. Of righteous soul, and possessed of great energy
thou art among men, a blazing fire in energy. We propitiate thee, O thou
of great learning! We surrender ourselves to thee. Do thou, for showing
us favour, take back from us this cow.'

"Chyavana said, 'The eye of a person that is poor or that has fallen into
distress, the eye of an ascetic, or the eye of a snake of virulent
poison, consumes a man with his very roots, even as a fire that, blazing
up with the assistance of the wind, consumes a stack of dry grass or
straw. I shall accent the cow that ye desire to present me. Ye fishermen,
freed from every sin, go ye to heaven without any delay, with these
fishes also that ye have caught with your nets.'

"Bhishma continued, 'After this, in consequence of the energy of the
great Rishi of cleansed soul, those fishermen along with all those fish
through virtue of those words that he had uttered, proceeded to heaven.
King Nahusha, beholding the fishermen ascending to heaven with those
fishes in their company, became filled with wonder, O chief of Bharata's
race. After this, the two Rishis, viz., the one born of a cow and the
other who was Chyavana of Bhrigu's race, gladdened king Nahusha by
granting him many boons. Then king Nahusha of great energy, that lord of
all the earth, filled with joy, O best of the Bharatas, said,
'Sufficient!' Like unto a second Indra, the chief of the celestials, he
accepted the boon about his own steadiness in virtue. The Rishis having
granted him the boon, the delighted king worshipped them both with great
reverence. As regards Chyavana, his vow having been completed, he
returned to his own asylum. The Rishi that had taken his birth from the
cow, and who was endued with great energy, also proceeded to his own
retreat. The Nishadas all ascended to heaven as also the fishes they had
caught, O monarch. King Nahusha, too, having obtained those valuable
boons, entered his own city. I have thus, O son, told thee everything
respecting what thou hadst asked me. The affection that is generated by
the sight alone of others as also by the fact of living with them, O
Yudhishthira, and the high-blessedness of kine too, and the ascertainment
of true righteousness, are the topics upon which I have discoursed. Tell
me, O hero what else is in thy breast.'"



SECTION LII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of great wisdom, a doubt I have that is very
great and that is as vast as the ocean itself. Listen to it, O
mighty-armed one and having learnt what it is, it behoves thee to explain
it unto me. I have a great curiosity with respect to Jamadagni's son, O
lord, viz., Rama, that foremost of all righteous persons. It behoveth
thee to gratify that curiosity. How was Rama born who was endued with
prowess incapable of being baffled? He belonged by birth to a race of
regenerate Rishis. How did he become a follower of Kshatriya practices?
Do thou, then, O king, recite to me in detail the circumstances of Rama's
birth. How also did a son of the race of Kusika who was Kshatriya become
a Brahmana? Great, without doubt, was the puissance of the high-souled
Rama, O chief of men, as also of Viswamitra. Why did the grandson of
Richika instead of his son become a Kshatriya in conduct? Why also did
the grandson of Kusika and not his son become a Brahmana? Why did such
untoward incidents overtake the grandsons of both, instead of their sons?
It behoveth thee to explain the truth in respect of these circumstances.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited an old history of the
discourse between Chyavana and Kusika, O Bharata! Endued with great
intelligence, Chyavana of Bhrigu's race, that best of ascetics beheld
(with his spiritual eye) the stain that would affect his own race (in
consequence of some descendant of his becoming wedded to Kshatriya
practice). Reflecting upon the merits and faults of that incident, as
also its strength and weakness, Chyavana endued with wealth of asceticism
became desirous of consuming the race of the Kusikas (for it was from
that race that the stain of Kshatriya practices would, he knew, affect
his own race). Repairing then to the presence of king Kusika, Chyavana
said unto him, 'O sinless one, the desire has arisen in my heart of
dwelling with thee for some time.'

"Kusika said, 'O holy one, residence together is an act which the learned
ordain for girls when these are given away. They that are endued with
wisdom always speak of the practice in such connection only. O Rishi
endued with wealth of asceticism, the residence which thou seekest with
me is not sanctioned by the ordinance. Yet, however opposed to the
dictates of duty and righteousness, I shall do what thou mayst be pleased
to command.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Ordering a seat to be placed for the great ascetic
Chyavana, king Kusika, accompanied by his wife, stood in the presence of
the ascetic. Bringing a little jar of water, the king offered him water
for washing his feet. He then, through his, servants, caused all the
rites to be duly performed in honour of his high-souled guest. The
high-souled Kusika, who was observant of restraints and vows, then
cheerfully presented, according to due forms, the ingredients consisting
of honey and the other things, to the great Rishi and induced him to
accept the same. Having welcomed and honoured the learned Brahmana in
this way, the king once more addressed him and said, 'We two await thy
orders! Command us what we are to do for thee, O holy one! If it is our
kingdom or wealth or kine, O thou of rigid vows, or all articles that are
given away in sacrifices, which thou wantest, tell us the word, and we
shall bestow all upon thee! This palace, the kingdom, this seat of
justice, await thy pleasure. Thou art the lord of all these! Do thou rule
the earth! As regards myself, I am completely dependent upon thee.'
Addressed in these words by the king, Chyavana of Bhrigu's race, filled
with great delight, said unto Kusika these words in reply.'

"Chyavana said, 'I do not, O king, covet thy kingdom, nor thy wealth, nor
the damsels thou hast, nor thy kine, nor thy provinces, nor articles
needed for sacrifice. Do thou listen to me. If it pleases thee and thy
wife, I shall commence to observe a certain vow. I desire thee and thy
wife to serve me during that period without any scruples. Thus addressed
by the Rishi, the king and the queen became filled with joy, O Bharata,
and answered him, saving, 'Be it so, O Rishi!' Delighted with the Rishi's
words, the king led him into an apartment of the palace. It was an
excellent one, agreeable to see. The king showed him everything in that
room. And the king said. 'This, O holy one, is thy bed. Do thou live here
as thou pleasest! O thou that art endued with wealth of asceticism,
myself and my queen shall strive our best to give thee every comfort and
every pleasure.' While they were thus conversing with each other, the sun
passed the meridian. The Rishi commanded the king to bring him food and
drink, King Kusika, bowing unto the Rishi, asked him, saying, 'What kind
of food is agreeable to thee? What food, indeed, shall be brought for
thee?' Filled with delight, the Rishi answered that rule of men, O
Bharata, saying, 'Let food that is proper be given to me.' Receiving
these words with respect, the king said, 'So be it!' and then offered
unto the Rishi food of the proper kind. Having finished his meals, the
holy Chyavana, conversant with every duty, addressed the king and the
queen, saying, 'I desire to slumber. O puissant one, sleep hinders me
now.' Proceeding thence to a chamber that had been prepared for him, that
best of Rishis then laid himself down upon a bed. The king and the queen
sat themselves down. The Rishi said to them, 'Do not, while I sleep,
awake me. Do ye keep yourselves awake and continually press my feet as
long as I sleep.' Without the least scruple, Kusika, conversant with
every duty, said, 'So be it!' Indeed, the king and the queen kept
themselves awake all night, duly engaged in tending and serving the Rishi
in the manner directed. The royal couple, O monarch accomplished the
Rishi's bidding with earnestness and attention. Meanwhile the holy
Brahmana, having thus laid his commands upon the king, slept soundly,
without changing his posture or turning even once, for a space of one and
twenty days. The king, O delighter of the Kurus, foregoing all food,
along with his wife, sat joyfully the whole time engaged in tending and
serving the Rishi. On the expiration of one and twenty days, the son of
Bhrigu rose of his own accord. The great ascetic then went out of the
room, without accosting them at all. Famished and toil-worn the king and
the queen followed him, but that foremost of Rishis did not deign to cast
a single glance upon any of them. Proceeding a little way, the son of
Bhrigu disappeared in the very sight of the royal couple (making himself
invisible by his Yoga-power). At this, the king, struck with grief, fell
down on the earth. Comforted, he rose up soon, and accompanied by his
queen, the monarch, possessed of great splendour, began to search
everywhere for the Rishi.'



SECTION LIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'After the Rishi had disappeared, what did the king
do and what also did highly-blessed spouse do? Tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'Having lost sight of the Rishi, the king, overwhelmed
with shame, toil-worn and losing his senses, returned to his palace,
accompanied by his queen. Entering his mansion in a cheerless mood, he
spoke not a word with any one. He thought only of that conduct of
Chyavana. With a despairing heart he then proceeded to his chamber. There
he saw the son of Bhrigu stretched as before on his bed. Beholding the
Rishi there, they wondered much. Indeed, they began to reflect upon that
very strange incident. The sight of the Rishi dispelled their fatigue.
Taking their seats once more by his side, they again set themselves to
gently press his feet as before. Meanwhile, the great ascetic continued
to sleep soundly as before. Only, he now lay on another side. Endued with
great energy, he thus passed another period measured by one and twenty
day. Agitated by their fears, the royal couple showed no change in their
attitude or sentiment towards the Rishi. Awaking then from his slumber,
the ascetic addressed the king and the queen, saying, 'Do ye rub my body
with oil. I wish to have a bath.' Famishing and toil-worn though they
were they readily assented, and soon approached the Rishi with a costly
oil that had been prepared by boiling it a hundred times. While the Rishi
was seated at his ease, the king and the queen, restraining speech,
continued to rub him. Endued with high ascetic merit the son of Bhrigu
did not once utter the word 'Sufficient.' Bhrigu's son, however, saw that
the royal couple were totally unmoved. Rising up suddenly, he entered the
bathing chamber. The diverse article necessary for a bath and such as
were fit for a king's use, were ready there. Without honouring, however,
any of those articles by appropriating them to his use, the Rishi once
more disappeared there and then by his Yoga-power, in the very sight of
king Kusika (and his spouse). This, however, O chief of the Bharatas,
failed to disturb the equanimity of the royal couple. The next time the
puissant Rishi was seen seated, after a bath on the throne. Indeed, it
was from that place that he then showed himself to the king and the
queen, O delighter of the Kurus. With a cheerful face, king Kusika,
together with his wife, then offered the Rishi cooked food with great
reverence. Endued with wisdom, and with heart totally unmoved, Kusika
made this offer. 'Let the food be brought' were the words that were then
uttered by the ascetic. Assisted by his spouse, the king soon brought
thither the food. There were diverse kinds of meat and different
preparations also thereof. There was a great variety of vegetables also
and pot-herbs. There were juicy cakes too among those viands, and several
agreeable kinds of confectionery, and solid preparations of milk. Indeed,
the viands offered presented different kinds of taste. Among them there
was also some food--the produce of the wilderness--such as ascetics liked
and took. Diverse agreeable kinds of fruit, fit to be eaten by kings,
were also there. There were Vadaras and Ingudas and Kasmaryas and
Bhallatakas. Indeed, the food that was offered contained such things as
are taken by persons leading a domestic mode of life as also such things
as are taken by denizens of the wilderness. Through fear of the Rishi's
curse, the king had caused all kinds of food to be collected and dressed
for his guest. All this food, brought from the kitchen, was placed before
Chyavana. A seat was also placed for him and a bed too was spread. The
viands were then caused to be covered with white cloths. Soon, however,
Chyavana of Bhrigu's race set fire to all the things and reduced them to
ashes. Possessed of great intelligence, the royal couple showed no wrath
at this conduct of the Rishi, who once more, after this made himself
invisible before the very eyes of the king and the queen. The Royal sage
Kusika thereupon stood there in the same posture for the whole night,
with his spouse by his side, and without speaking a word. Endued with
great prosperity, he did not give way to wrath. Every day, good and pure
food of diverse kinds, excellent beds, abundant articles needed for bath,
and cloths of various kinds, were collected and kept in readiness in the
palace for the Rishi. Indeed, Chyavana failed to notice any fault in the
conduct of the king. Then the regenerate Rishi, addressing king Kusika,
said unto him, 'Do thou with thy spouse, yoke thyself unto a car and bear
me on it to whichever place I shall direct.' Without the least scruple,
the king answered Chyavana endued with wealth of asceticism, saying, 'So
be it!' and he further enquired of the Rishi, asking, 'Which car shall I
bring? Shall it be my pleasure-car for making progress of pleasure, or,
shall it be my battle-car? Thus addressed by the delighted and contented
monarch, the ascetic said unto him, 'Do thou promptly equip that car of
thine with which thou penetratest into hostile cities. Indeed that
battle-car of thine, with every weapon, with its standard and flags, its
darts and javelins and golden columns and poles, should be made ready.
Its rattle resembles the tinkling of bells. It is adorned with numerous
arches made of pure gold. It is always furnished with high and excellent
weapons numbering by hundreds!' The king said, 'So be it!' and soon
caused his great battle-car to be equipped. And he yoked his wife thereto
on the left and his own self on the right. And the king placed on the
car, among its other equipments, the goad which had three handles and
which had a point at once hard as the thunderbolt and sharp as the
needle.[307] Having placed every requisite upon the car, the king said
unto the Rishi, 'O holy one, whither shall the car proceed? O, let the
son of Bhrigu issue his command! This thy car shall proceed to the place
which thou mayst be pleased to indicate.' Thus addressed the holy man
replied unto the king, saying, 'Let the car go hence, dragged slowly,
step by step. Obedient to my will, do ye two proceed in such a way that I
may not feel any fatigue, I should be borne away pleasantly, and let all
thy people see this progress that I make through their midst. Let no
person that comes to me, as I proceed along the road, be driven away. I
shall make gifts of wealth unto all. Unto them amongst the Brahmanas that
may approach me on the way, I shall grant their wishes and bestow upon
all of them gems and wealth without stint. Let all this be accomplished,
O king, and do not entertain any scruples.' Hearing these words of the
Rishi, the king summoned his servants and said, 'Ye should, without any
fear, give away whatever the ascetic will order.' Then jewels and gems in
abundance, and beautiful women, and pairs of sheep, and coined and
uncoined gold, and huge elephants resembling hills or mountain summits,
and all the ministers of the king, began to follow the Rishi as he was
borne away on that car. Cries of 'Oh' and 'Alas' arose from every part of
the city which was plunged in grief at that extraordinary sight. And the
king and the queen were suddenly struck by the Rishi with that goad
equipped with sharp point. Though thus struck on the back and the cheeks,
the royal couple still showed no sign of agitation. On the other hand,
they continued to bear the Rishi on as before. Trembling from head to
foot, for no food had passed their lips for fifty nights, and exceedingly
weak, the heroic couple somehow succeeded in dragging that excellent car.
Repeatedly and deeply cut by the goad, the royal couple became covered
with blood. Indeed, O monarch, they then looked like a couple of Kinsuka
trees in the flowering season. The citizens, beholding the plight to
which their king and queen had been reduced, became afflicted with great
grief. Filled with fear at the prospect of the curse of the Rishi, they
kept silent under their misery. Gathering in knots they said unto each
other, 'Behold the might of penances! Although all of us are angry, we
are still unable to look at the Rishi! Great is the energy of the holy
Rishi of cleaned soul! Behold also the endurance of the king and his
royal spouse! Though worn out with toil and hunger, they are still
bearing the car! The son of Bhrigu notwithstanding the misery he caused
to Kusika and his queen, failed to mark any sign of dissatisfaction or
agitation in them.'

"Bhishma continued, 'The perpetuator of Bhrigu's race beholding the king
and the queen totally unmoved, began to give away very largely (wealth
obtained from the king's treasury) as if he were a second Lord of
Treasures. At this act also, king Kusika Showed no mark of
dissatisfaction. He did as the Rishi commanded (in the matter of those
gifts). Seeing all this, that illustrious and best of ascetics became
delighted. Coming down from that excellent car, he unharnessed the royal
couple. Having freed them, he addressed them duly. Indeed, the son of
Bhrigu, in a soft, deep, and delighted voice, said, 'I am ready to give
an excellent boon unto you both!' Delicate as they were, their bodies had
been pierced with the goad. That best of ascetics, moved by affection,
softly touched them with his hands whose healing virtues resembled those
of nectar itself, O chief of the Bharatas. Then the king answered, 'My
wife and I have felt no toil!' Indeed, all their fatigue had been
dispelled by the puissance of the Rishi, and hence it was that the king
could say so unto the Rishi. Delighted with their conduct, the
illustrious Chyavana said unto them, 'I have never before spoken an
untruth. It must, therefore, be as I have said. This spot on the banks of
the Ganga is very delightful and auspicious. I shall, observant of a vow,
dwell for a little while here, O king! Do thou return to thy city. Thou
are fatigued! Thou shalt come again. Tomorrow, O king, thou shalt,
returning with thy spouse, behold me even here. Thou shouldst not give
way to wrath or grief. The time is come when thou shalt reap a great
reward! That which is coveted by thee and which is in thy heart shall
verily be accomplished.' Thus addressed by the Rishi, king Kusika, with a
delighted heart, replied unto the Rishi in these words of grave import,
'I have cherished no wrath or grief, O highly-blessed one! We have been
cleansed and sanctified by thee, O holy one! We have once more become
endued with youth. Behold our bodies have become exceedingly beautiful
and possessed of great strength. I do not any longer see those wounds and
cicatrices that were caused by thee on our persons with thy goad. Verily,
with my spouse, I am in good health. I see my goddess become as beautiful
in body as an Apsara. Verily, she is endued with as much comeliness and
splendour as she had ever been before. All this, O great ascetic, is due
to thy grace. Verily, there is nothing astonishing in all this, O holy
Rishi of puissance ever unbaffled.' Thus addressed by the king, Chyavana
said unto him, 'Thou shalt, with thy spouse, return hither tomorrow, O
monarch!' With these words, the royal sage Kusika was dismissed. Saluting
the Rishi, the monarch, endued with a handsome body, returned to his
capital like unto a second chief of the celestials. The counsellors then,
with the priest, came out to receive him. His troops and the dancing
women and all his subjects, also did the same. Surrounded by them all,
king Kusika, blazing with beauty and splendour, entered his city, with a
delighted heart, and his praises were hymned by bards and encomiasts.
Having entered his city and performed all his morning rites, he ate with
his wife. Endued with great splendour, the monarch then passed the night
happily. Each beheld the other to be possessed anew of youth. All their
afflictions and pains having ceased, they beheld each other to resemble a
celestial. Endued with the spendour they had obtained as a boon from that
foremost of Brahmanas, and possessed as they were of forms that were
exceedingly comely and beautiful, both of them passed a happy night in
their bed. Meanwhile, the spreader of the feats of Bhrigu's race, viz.,
the Rishi possessed of the wealth of penances, converted, by his
Yoga-power, that delightful wood on the bank of the Ganga into a retreat
full of wealth of every kind and adorned with every variety of jewels and
gems in consequence of which it surpassed in beauty and splendour the
very abode of the chief of the celestials."



SECTION LIV

"Bhishma said, 'When that night passed away, the high-souled king Kusika
awoke and went through his morning rites. Accompanied by his wife he then
proceeded towards that wood which the Rishi had selected for his
residence. Arrived there, the monarch saw a palatial mansion made
entirely of gold. Possessed of a thousand columns each of which was made
of gems and precious stones, it looked like an edifice belonging to the
Gandharvas.[308] Kusika beheld in every part of that structure evidences
of celestial design. And he beheld hills with delightful valleys, and
lakes with lotuses on their bosom; and mansions full of costly and
curious articles, and gateways and arches, O Bharata. And the king saw
many open glades and open spots carpeted with grassy verdure, and
resembling level fields of gold. And he saw many Sahakaras adorned with
blossoms, and Ketakas and Uddalakas, and Dhavas and Asokas, and
blossoming Kundas, and Atimuktas. And he saw there many Champakas and
Tilakas and Bhavyas and Panasas and Vanjulas and Karnikaras adorned with
flowers. And the king beheld many Varanapushpas and the creepers called
Ashtapadika all clipped properly and beautifully.[309] And the king
beheld trees on which lotuses of all varieties bloomed in all their
beauty, and some of which bore flowers of every season. And he noticed
also many mansions that looked like celestial cars or like beautiful
mountains. And at some places, O Bharata, there were tanks and lakes full
of cool water and at others were those that were full of warm or hot
water. And there were diverse kinds of excellent seats and costly beds,
and bedsteads made of gold and gems and overlaid with cloths and carpets
of great beauty and value. Of comestible there were enormous quantities,
well-dressed and ready for use. And there were talking parrots and
she-parrots and Bhringarajas and Kokilas and Catapatras with Koyashtikas
and Kukkubhas, and peacocks and cocks and Datyuhas and Jivajivakas and
Chakoras and monkeys and swans and Sarasas and Chakravakas.[310] Here and
there he beheld bevies of rejoicing Apsaras and conclaves of happy
Gandharvas, O monarch. And he beheld other Gandharvas at other places
rejoicing with their dear spouses. The king sometimes beheld these sights
and sometimes could not see them (for they seemed to disappear from
before his eyes). The monarch heard also melodious strains of vocal music
and the agreeable voices of preceptors engaged in lecturing to their
disciples on the Vedas and the scriptures. And the monarch also heard the
harmonious cackle of the geese sporting in the lakes. Beholding such
exceedingly wonderful sights, the king began to reflect inwardly, saying,
'Is this a dream? Or is all this due to an aberration of my mind? Or, is
it all real? O, I have, without casting off my earthly tenement, attained
to the beatitude of heaven! This land is either the sacred country of the
Uttara-Kurus, or the abode, called Amaravati, of the chief of the
celestials! O, what are these wonderful sights that I behold!' Reflecting
in this strain, the monarch at last saw that foremost of Rishis. In that
palace of gold (endued) with columns (made) of jewels and gems, lay the
son of Bhrigu stretched on a costly and excellent bed. With his wife by
his side the king approached with a delighted heart the Rishi as he lay
on that bed. Chyavana, however, quickly disappeared at this, with the bed
itself upon which he lay. The king then beheld the Rishi at another part
of those woods seated on a mat made of Kusa grass, and engaged in
mentally reciting some high Mantras. By his Yoga-power, even thus did
that Brahmana stupefy the king. In a moment that delightful wood, those
bevies of Apsaras, those bands of Gandharvas, those beautiful trees,--all
disappeared. The bank of the Ganga became as silent as usual, and
presented the old aspect of its being covered with Kusa grass and
ant-hills. King Kusika with his wife having beheld that highly wonderful
sight and its quick disappearance also, became filled with amazement.
With a delighted heart, the monarch addressed his wife and said unto her,
'Behold, O amiable one, the various agreeable scenes and sights,
occurring nowhere else, which we two have just witnessed! All this is due
to the grace of Bhrigu's son and the puissance of his penances. By
penances all that becomes attainable which one cherishes in one's
imagination. Penances are superior to even the sovereignty over the three
worlds. By penances well-performed, emancipation itself may be achieved.
Behold, the puissance of the high-souled and celestial Rishi Chyavana
derived from his penances. He can, at his pleasure, create even other
worlds (than those which exist). Only Brahmanas are born in this world to
attain to speech and understanding and acts that are sacred. Who else
than Chyavana could do all this? Sovereignty may be acquired with ease.
But the status of a Brahmana is not so attainable. It was through the
puissance of a Brahmana that we were harnessed to a car like well-broken
animals!' These reflections that passed through the king's brain became
known to Chyavana. Ascertaining the king's thoughts, the Rishi addressed
him and said, 'Come hither quickly!' Thus addressed, the king and the
queen approached the great ascetic, and, bending their heads, they
worshipped him who deserved worship. Uttering a benediction upon the
monarch, the Rishi, possessed of great intelligence, O chief of men,
comforted the king and said, 'Sit down on that seat!' After this, O
monarch, the son of Bhrigu, without guile or insincerity of any kind,
gratified the king with many soft words, and then said, 'O king, thou
hast completely subjugated the five organs of action and the five organs
of knowledge with the mind as their sixth. Thou hast for this come out
unscathed from the fiery ordeal I had prepared for thee. I have been
properly honoured and adored, O son, by thee, O foremost of all persons
possessed of speech. Thou hast no sin, not even a minute one, in thee!
Give me leave, O king, for I shall now proceed to the place I came from.
I have been exceedingly pleased with thee, O monarch! Do thou accept the
boon I am ready to give.'

"Kusika said, 'In thy presence, O holy one, I have stayed like one
staying in the midst of a fire. That I have not yet, O chief of Bhrigu's
race been consumed, is sufficient! Even this is the highest boon that has
been obtained, O delighter of Bhrigu! That thou hast been gratified by
me, O Brahmana, and that I have succeeded in rescuing my race from
destruction, O sinless one, constitute in my case the best boons. This I
regard, O learned Brahmana, as a distinct evidence of thy grace. The end
of my life has been accomplished. Even this is what I regard the very end
of my sovereignty. Even this is the highest fruit of my penances![311]
If, O learned Brahmana, thou hast been pleased with me, O delighter of
Bhrigu, then do thou expound some doubts which are in my mind!'



SECTION LV

"Chyavana said, 'Do thou accept a boon from me. Do thou also, O chief of
men, tell me what the doubt is that is in thy mind. I shall certainly
accomplish all thy purposes.'

"Kusika said, 'If thou hast been gratified by me, O holy one, do thou
then, O son of Bhrigu, tell me thy object in residing in my palace for
sometime, for I desire to hear it. What was thy object in sleeping on the
bed I assigned thee for one and twenty days continuously, without
changing sides? O foremost of ascetics, what also was thy object, again,
in going out of the room without speaking a single word? Why didst thou,
again, without any ostensible reason, make thyself invisible, and once
more become visible? Why, O learned Brahmana, didst thou again, lay
thyself down on the bed and sleep as before for one and twenty days? For
what reason didst thou go out after thou wert rubbed by us with oil in
view of thy bath? Why also, after having caused diverse kinds of food in
my palace to be collected, didst thou consume them with the aid of fire?
What was the cause of thy sudden journey through my city on the car? What
object hadst thou in view in giving away so much wealth? What was thy
motive in showing us the wonders of the forest created by the
Yoga-puissance? What indeed was thy motive for showing, O great ascetic,
so many palatial mansions made of gold and so many bedsteads supported on
posts of jewels, and gems? Why also did all these wonders vanish from our
sight? I wish to hear the cause of all this. In thinking of all these
acts of thine, O perpetuator of Bhrigu's race, I became stupefied
repeatedly. I fail to find what the certain motive was which influenced
thee! O thou, that art endued with wealth of penances, I wish to hear the
truth about all those acts of thine in detail.'

"Chyavana said, 'Listen to me as I tell thee in detail the reasons which
had impelled me in all these acts of mine. Asked by thee, O monarch, I
cannot refuse to enlighten thee. In days past, on one occasion, when the
deities had assembled together, the Grandsire Brahman said some words I
heard them, O king, and shall presently repeat them to thee.' In
consequence of a contention between Brahmana and Kshatriya energy, there
will occur an intermixture in my race.[312] Thy grandson, O king, will
become endued with great energy and puissance. Hearing this, I came
hither, resolved to exterminate thy race. Indeed, I came, O Kusika,
seeking the utter extermination of thy race,--in fact, for consuming into
ashes all thy descendants. Impelled by this motive I came to thy palace,
O monarch, and said unto thee, 'I shall observe some vow. Do thou attend
upon me and serve me dutifully. While residing, however, in thy house I
failed to find any laches in thee. It is for that reason, O royal sage,
that thou art still alive, for otherwise thou wouldst have by this time
been numbered with the dead. It was with this resolution that I slept for
one and twenty days in the hope that somebody would awake me before I
arose of my own accord. Thou, however, with thy wife, didst not awaken
me. Even then, O best of kings, I became pleased with thee. Rising from
my bed I went out of the chamber without accosting any of you. I did
this, O monarch, in the hope that thou wouldst ask me and thus I would
have an opportunity of cursing thee. I then made myself invisible, and
again showed myself in the room of thy palace, and, once more betaking
myself to Yoga, slept for one and twenty days. The motive that impelled
me was this. Worn out with toil and hunger you two would be angry with me
and do what would be unpleasant to me. It was from this intention that I
caused thyself and thy spouse to be afflicted with hunger. In thy heart
however, O king, the slightest feeling of wrath or vexation did not rise.
For this, O monarch, I became highly delighted with thee. When I caused
diverse kinds of food to be brought and then set fire to them, I hoped
that thyself with thy wife wouldst give way to wrath at the sight. Even
that act however, of mine was tolerated by thee. I then ascended the car,
O monarch, and addressed thee, saying, 'Do thou with thy wife bear me.'
Thou didst what I bade, without the least scruple, O king! I became
filled with delight at this. The gifts of wealth I made could not provoke
thy anger. Pleased with thee, O king, I created with the aid of my Yoga
puissance that forest which thyself with thy wife didst behold here.
Listen, O monarch, to the object I had. For gratifying thee and thy queen
I caused thee to have a glimpse of heaven. All those things which thou
hast seen in these woods, O monarch, are a foretaste of heaven. O best of
kings, for a little while I caused thee and thy spouse to behold, in even
your earthly bodies, some sights of heaven. All this was done for showing
the puissance of penances and the reward that is in store for
righteousness. The desire that arose in thy heart, O monarch, at the
sight of those delightful objects, is known to me. Thou becamest desirous
of obtaining the status of a Brahmana and the merit of penances, O lord
of Earth, disregarding the sovereignty of the earth, nay, the sovereignty
of very heaven! That Which thou thoughtest, O king, was even this. The
status of a Brahmana is exceedingly difficult to obtain; after becoming a
Brahmana, it is exceedingly difficult to obtain the status of a Rishi;
for even a Rishi it is difficult to become an ascetic! I tell thee that
thy desire will be gratified. From thee, O Kusika, will spring a
Brahmana, who shall be called after thy name. The person that will be the
third in descent from thee shall attain to the status of a Brahmana.
Through the energy of the Bhrigus, thy grandson, O monarch, will be an
ascetic endued with the splendour of fire. He shall always strike all
men, indeed, the inhabitants of the three worlds, with fear. I tell thee
the truth. O royal sage, do thou accept the boon that is now in thy mind.
I shall soon set out on a tour to all the sacred waters. Time is
expiring.'

"Kusika said, 'Even this, O great ascetic, is a high boon, in my case,
for thou hast been gratified by me. Let that take place which thou hast
said. Let my grandson become a Brahmana, O sinless one! Indeed, let the
status of Brahmanahood attach to my race, O holy one. This is the boon I
ask for. I desire to once more ask thee in detail, O holy one! In what
way, O delighter of Bhrigu, will the status of Brahmanahood attach to my
race? Who will be my friend? Who will have my affection and
respect?'"[313]



SECTION LVI

"Chyavana said, 'I should certainly, O chief of men, tell you everything
about the circumstance for which, O monarch, I came hither for
exterminating thy race. This is well-known, O king, that the Kshatriyas
should always have the assistance of the sons of Bhrigu in the matter of
sacrifices. Through an irresistible decree of Destiny, the Kshatriyas and
the Bhargavas will fall out. The Kshatriyas, O king, will slay the
descendants of Bhrigu. Afflicted by an ordinance of fate, they will
exterminate the race of Bhrigu, not sparing even infants in their
mothers' wombs. There will then spring in Bhrigu's race a Rishi of the
name of Urva. Endued with great energy, he will in splendour certainly
resemble fire or the sun. He will cherish such wrath (upon hearing of the
extermination of his race) as will be sufficient to consume the three
worlds. He will be competent to reduce the whole earth with all her
mountains and forests into ashes. For a little while he will quell the
flames of that fiery rage, throwing it into the Mare's mouth that wanders
through the ocean. He will have a son of the name of Richika. The whole
science of arms, O sinless one, in its embodied form will come to him,
for the extermination of the entire Kshatriya race, through a decree of
Destiny. Receiving that science by inward light, he will, by
Yoga-puissance, communicate it to his son, the highly-blessed Jamadagni
of cleansed soul. That tiger of Bhrigu's race will bear that science in
his mind. O thou of righteous soul, Jamadagni will wed a girl, taking her
from thy race, for spreading its glory, O chief of the Bharatas. Having
obtained for wife the daughter of Gadhi and thy grand-daughter, O king
that great ascetic will beget a regenerate son endued with Kshatriya
accomplishments. In thy race will be born a son, a Kshatriya endued with
the virtues of a Brahmana. Possessed of great righteousness, he will be
the son of Gadhi. Known by the name of Viswamitra, he will in energy come
to be regarded as the equal of Vrihaspati himself, the preceptor of the
celestials. The illustrious Richika will grant this son to thy race, this
Kshatriya that will be endued with high penances. In the matter of this
exchange of sons, (viz., a Kshatriya son in the race of Bhrigu and a
Brahamana son in thy race) the cause will be two women. All this will
happen at the command of the grandsire. It will never be otherwise. Unto
one that is third in descent from thee, the status of Brahmanahood will
attach. Thou shalt become a relative (by marriage) of the Bhargavas.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of the high-souled ascetic
Chyavana, king Kusika became filled with joy, and made answer in the
following words, 'Indeed, O best of the Bharatas', he said, 'So be it!'
Endued with high energy, Chyavana once more addressed the king, and urged
him to accept a boon from himself. The king replied, 'Very well.' From
thee, O great ascetic, I shall obtain the fruition of my wish. Let my
race become invested with the status of Brahmanahood, and let it always
set its heart upon righteousness.' The ascetic Chyavana, thus solicited,
granted the king's prayer, and bidding farewell to the monarch, set out
on his intended tour to the sacred waters. I have now told thee
everything, O Bharata, relating to thy questions, viz., how the Bhrigus
and the Kusikas became connected with each other by marriage. Indeed, O
king, everything fell out as the Rishi Chyavana had said. The birth of
Rama (of Bhrigu's race) and of Viswamitra (of Kusika's race) happened in
the way that Chyavana had indicated.'"



SECTION LVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Hearing thy words I become stupefied, O grandsire!
Reflecting that the earth is now destitute of a very large number of
kings all of whom were possessed of great prosperity, my heart becomes
filled with grief. Having conquered the earth and acquired kingdoms
numbered by hundreds, O Bharata, I turn with grief, O Grandsire, at the
thought of the millions of men I have slaughtered. Alas, what will be the
plight of those foremost ladies who have been deprived by us of husbands
and sons and maternal uncles and brothers? Having slain those Kurus--our
kinsmen, that is, our friends and well-wishers,--we shall have to sink in
hell, beads (hanging) downwards. There is no doubt of this. I desire, O
Bharata, to address my body to severe penances. With that end in view, O
king, I wish to receive instructions from thee.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The high-souled Bhishma, hearing these words of
Yudhishthira, reflected upon them acutely with the aid of his
understanding, and addressed Yudhishthira in reply.'

"Bhishma said, 'Hear what I say unto thee. It is exceedingly wonderful,
and constitutes a great mystery. The topic is the object that creatures
obtain after death as the rewards of particular acts or courses of
conduct they follow. One attains to Heaven by penances. By penances one
attains to fame. By penances, O puissant king, one attains to length of
life and all articles of enjoyment. By penances one attains to knowledge,
to science, to health and freedom from disease, beauty of person,
prosperity, and blessedness, O chief of Bharata's race. By penances one
attains to wealth. By observing the vow of taciturnity one succeeds in
bringing the whole world under one's sway. By making gifts one acquires
all kinds of enjoyable articles. By observing the right of Diksha one
acquires birth in a good and high family. Those that spend their lives
subsisting only upon fruits and roots (and avoiding cooked food) succeed
in obtaining kingdom and sovereignty. Those that live upon the leaves of
plants and trees as their food succeed in attaining to heaven. One that
subsists upon water only attains to heaven. By making gifts one simply
increases one's wealth. By serving with reverence one's preceptor one
acquires learning. By performing Sraddhas every day in honour of one's
Pitris (manes), one acquires a large number of children. By observing
Diksha upon potherbs and vegetables, one acquires a large number of kine.
Those that subsist upon grass and straw succeed in attaining to heaven.
By bathing thrice every day with the necessary rites one acquires a large
number of spouses. By drinking water alone one acquires residence in the
regions of Prajapati. The Brahmana, who bathes every day and recites
sacred Mantras in the twilights, becomes possessed of the status of
Daksha himself. By worshipping the deities in a wilderness or desert, one
acquires a kingdom or sovereignty, and by observing the vow of casting
off the body by a long fast, one ascends to Heaven. One possessed of the
wealth of penances and always passing his days in Yoga obtains good beds
and seats and vehicles. Casting off the body by entering a blazing fire,
one becomes an object of reverence in the region of Brahman. Those that
lie on the hard and bare ground acquire houses and beds. Those that
clothe themselves in rags and barks obtain good robes and ornaments. By
avoiding the several agreeable tastes one succeeds in acquiring great
prosperity. By abstaining from meat and fish, one gets long-lived
children. One who passes some time in that mode of life which is called
Udavasa, becomes the very lord of Heaven. The man who speaks the truth, O
best of men, succeeds in sporting happily with the deities themselves. By
making gifts one acquires great fame in consequence of one's high
achievements. By abstention from cruelty one acquires health and freedom
from disease. By serving Brahmanas with reverence one attains to kingdom
and sovereignty, and the high status of a Brahmana. By making gifts of
water and other drinks, one acquires eternal fame in consequence of high
achievements. By making gifts of food one acquires diverse articles of
enjoyment. One who gives peace unto all creatures (by refraining from
doing them any injury), becomes freed from every region. By serving the
deities one obtains a kingdom and celestial beauty. By presenting lights
at places which are dark and frequented by men, one acquires a good
vision. By giving away good and beautiful objects one acquires a good
memory and understanding. By giving away scents and garlands, one
acquires fame that spreads over a large area. Those who abstain from
shaving off their hair and beards succeed in obtaining excellent
children.. By observing fasts and Diksha and baths, O Bharata, for twelve
years (according to the ordinance), one acquires a region that is
superior to that attainable by unreturning heroes. By bestowing one's
daughter on an eligible bridegroom according to the Brahma form, one
obtains, O best of men, male and female slaves and ornaments and fields
and houses. By performing sacrifices and observing fasts, one ascends to
Heaven, O Bharata. The man who gives away fruits and flowers succeeds in
acquiring auspicious knowledge. The man who gives a thousand kine with
horns adorned with gold, succeeds in acquiring heaven. Even this has been
said by the very deities in a conclave in heaven. One who gives away a
Kapila cow with her calf, with a brazen pot of milking with horns adorned
with gold, and possessed of diverse other accomplishments, obtains the
fruition of all his wishes from that cow. Such a person, in consequence
of that act of gift, resides in heaven for as many years as there are
hairs on the body of the cow and rescues in the next world (from the
misery of hell) his sons and grandsons and all his race to the seventh
degree.[314] The regions of the Vasus become attainable to that man who
gives away a cow with horns beautifully decorated with gold, accompanied
with a brazen jar for milking, along with a piece of cloth embroidered
with gold, a measure of sesame and a sum of money as Dakshina. A gift of
kine rescues the giver in the next world then he finds himself falling
into the deep darkness of hell and restrained by his own acts in this
world, like a boat with sails that have caught the air rescuing a person
from being drowned in the sea. He who bestows a daughter according to the
Brahma form upon an eligible person, or who makes a gift of land unto a
Brahmana, or who gives food (to a Brahmana) according to due rites,
succeeds in attaining to the region of Purandara. That man who makes a
gift of a house, equipped with every kind of furniture, unto a Brahmana
given to Vedic studies and possessed of every accomplishment and good
behaviour, acquires residence in the country of the Uttara-Kurus. By
making gifts of draft bullocks, a person acquires the region of the
Vasus. Gifts of gold lead to heaven. Gifts of pure gold lead to greater
merit still. By making a gift of an umbrella one acquires a palatial
mansion. By making a gift of a pair of sandals or shoes one acquires good
vehicles. The reward attached to a gift of cloths is personal beauty, and
by making gifts of scents one becomes a fragrant person in one's next
life. One who gives flowers and fruits and plants and trees unto a
Brahmana, acquires, without any labour, palatial mansion equipped with
beautiful women and full of plenty of wealth. The giver of food and drink
of different tastes and of other articles of enjoyment succeeds in
acquiring a copious supply of such articles. The giver, again, of houses
and cloths gets articles of a similar kind. There is no doubt about it.
That person who makes gifts of garlands and incense and scents and
unguents and the articles needed by men after a bath, and floral wreaths,
unto Brahmanas, becomes freed from every disease and possessed of
personal beauty, sports in joy in the region reserved for great kings.
The man, O king, who makes unto a Brahmana the gift of a house that is
stored with grain, furnished with beds full of much wealth, auspicious,
and delightful, acquires a palatial residence. He who gives unto a
Brahmana a good bed perfumed with fragrant scents, overlaid with an
excellent sheet, and equipped with pillows, wins without any effort on
his part a beautiful wife, belonging to a high family and of agreeable
manners. The man who takes to a hero's bed on the field of battle becomes
the equal of the Grandsire Brahman himself. There is no end higher than
this. Even this is what the great Rishis have declared.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of his grandfather,
Yudhishthira, the delighter of the Kurus, became desirous of the end that
is reserved for heroes and no longer expressed any disgust at leading a
householder's mode of life. Then, O foremost of men, Yudhishthira,
addressing all the other sons of Pandu, said unto them, 'Let the words
which our grandfather has said command your faith.' At this, all the
Pandavas with the famous Draupadi amongst them, applauded the words of
Yudhishthira and said, 'Yes'.'"



SECTION LVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I desire, O chief of the Bharatas, to hear from thee
what the rewards are which are attached, O best of the Kurus, to the
planting of trees and the digging of tanks.'

"Bhishma said, 'A piece of land that is agreeable to the sight, fertile,
situate in the midst of delightful scenes adorned with diverse kinds of
metals, and inhabited by all sorts of creatures, is regarded as the
foremost of sports. A particular portion of such land should be selected
for digging a tank. I shall tell thee, in due order, about the different
kinds of tanks. I shall also tell thee what the merits also are that
attach to the digging of tanks (with the view of drawing water for the
benefit of all creatures). The man who causes a tank to be dug becomes
entitled to the respect and worship of the three worlds. A tank full of
water is as agreeable and beneficial as the house of a friend. It is
gratifying to Surya himself. It also contributes to growth to the
deities. It is the foremost of all things that lead to fame (with respect
to the person who causes it to be excavated). The wise have said that the
excavation of a tank contributes to the aggregate of three,
Righteousness, Wealth and Pleasure. A tank is said to be properly
excavated, if it is made on a piece of land that is inhabited by
respectable persons. A tank is said to be subservient to all the four
purposes of living creatures. Tanks, again, are regarded as constituting
the excellent beauty of a country. The deities and human beings and
Gandharvas and Pitris and Uragas and Rakshasas and even immobile
beings--all resort to a tank full of water as their refuge. I shall,
therefore, tell thee what the merits are that have been said by great
Rishis to be attached to tanks, and what the rewards are that are
attainable by persons that cause them to be excavated. The wise have said
that that man reaps the merit of an Agnihotra sacrifice in whose tank
water is held in the season of the rains. The high reward in the world
that is reaped by the person who makes a gift of a thousand kine is won
by that man in whose tank water is held in the season of autumn. The
person in whose tank water occurs in the cold season acquires the merit
of one who performs a sacrifice with plentiful gifts of gold. That person
in whose tanks water occurs in the season of dew, wins, the wise have
said, the merits of an Agnishtoma sacrifice. That man in whose well-made
tank water occurs in the season of spring acquires the merit of the
Atiratra sacrifice. That man in whose tank water occurs in the season of
summer acquires, the Rishis say, the merits that attach to a
horse-sacrifice. That man rescues all his race in whose tank kine are
seen to allay their thirst and from which righteous men draw their water.
That man in whose tank kine slake their thirst as also other animals and
birds, and human beings, acquires the merits of a horse-sacrifice.
Whatever measure of water is drunk from one's tank and whatever measure
is taken therefrom by others for purposes of bathing, all become stored
for the benefit of the excavator of the tank and he enjoys the same for
unending days in the next world. Water, especially in the other world, is
difficult to obtain, O son. A gift of drink produces eternal happiness.
Make gifts of sesame here. Make gifts of water. Do thou also give lamps
(for lighting dark places.) While alive and awake, do thou sport in
happiness with kinsmen. These are acts which thou shalt not be able to
achieve in the other world.[315] The gift of drink, O chief of men, is
superior to every other gift. In point of merit it is distinguished above
all other gifts. Therefore, do thou make gifts of water. Even thus have
the Rishis declared what the high merits of the excavation of tanks are I
shall now discourse to thee on the planting of trees. Of immobile objects
six classes have been spoken of. They are Vrikshas, Gulmas, Latas,
Vallis, Twaksaras, and Trinas of diverse kinds.[316] These are the
several kinds of vegetables. Listen now to the merit that attaches to
their planting. By planting trees one acquires fame in the world of men
and auspicious rewards in the world hereafter. Such a man is applauded
and reverenced in the world of the Pitris. Such a man's name does not
perish even when he becomes a citizen of the world of deities. The man
who plants trees rescues the ancestors and descendants of both his
paternal and maternal lines. Do thou, therefore, plant trees, O
Yudhishthira! The trees that a man plants become the planter's children.
There is no doubt about this. Departing from this world, such a man
ascends to Heaven. Verily many eternal regions of bliss become his. Trees
gratify the deities by their flowers; the Pitris by their fruits; and all
guests and strangers by the shadow they give. Kinnaras and Uragas and
Rakshasas and deities and Gandharvas and human beings, as also Rishis,
all have recourse to trees as their refuge. Trees that bear flowers and
fruits gratify all men. The planter of trees is rescued in the next world
by the trees he plants like children rescuing their own father.
Therefore, the man that is desirous of achieving his own good, should
plant trees by the side of tanks and cherish them like his own children.
The trees that a man plants are, according to both reason and the
scriptures, the children of the planter. That Brahmana who excavates a
tank, and he that plants trees, and he that performs sacrifices, are all
worshipped in heaven even as men that are devoted to truthfulness of
speech. Hence one should cause tanks to be excavated and trees to be
planted, worship the deities in diverse sacrifices, and speak the truth.'"



SECTION LIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Amongst all those gifts that are mentioned in the
treatises other than the Vedas, which gift, O chief of Kuru's race, is
the most distinguished in thy opinion? O puissant one, great is the
curiosity I feel with respect to this matter. Do thou discourse to me
also of that gift which follows the giver into the next world.'[317]

"Bhishma said, 'An assurance unto all creatures of love and affection and
abstention from every kind of injury, acts of kindness and favour done to
a person in distress, gifts of articles made unto one that solicits with
thirst and agreeable to the solicitor's wishes, and whatever gifts are
made without the giver's ever thinking of them as gifts made by him,
constitute, O chief of Bharata's race, the highest and best of gifts.
Gift of gold, gift of kine, and gift of earth,--these are regarded as
sin-cleansing. They rescue the giver from his evil acts. O chief of men,
do thou always make such gifts unto those that are righteous. Without
doubt, gifts rescue the giver from all his sins. That person who wishes
to make his gifts eternal should always give unto persons possessed of
the requisite qualifications whatever articles are desired by all and
whatever things are the best in his house. The man who makes gifts of
agreeable things and who does to others what is agreeable to others,
always succeeds in obtaining things that are agreeable to himself. Such a
person certainly becomes agreeable unto all, both here and hereafter.
That man, O Yudhishthira, is a cruel wretch, who, through vanity, does
not, to the extent of his means, attend to the wishes of one who is poor
and helpless, and who solicits assistance.[318] He is verily the foremost
of men who shows favour unto even an helpless enemy fallen into distress
when such enemy presents himself and prays for help. No man is equal to
him (in merit) who satisfies the hunger of a person that is emaciated,
possessed of learning, destitute of the means of support, and weakened by
misery. One should always, O son of Kunti, dispel by every means in one's
power, the distress of righteous persons observant of vows and acts, who,
though destitute of sons and spouses and plunged into misery, do not yet
solicit others for any kind of assistance. Those persons who do not utter
blessings upon the deities and men (in expectation of gifts), who are
deserving of reverence and always contented, and who subsist upon such
alms as they get without solicitation of any kind, are regarded as
veritable snakes of virulent poison. Do thou, O Bharata, always protect
thyself from them by making gifts unto them. They are competent to make
the foremost of Ritwikas. Thou art to find them out by means of thy spies
and agents.[319] Thou shouldst honour those men by gifts of good houses
equipped with every necessary article, with slaves and serving men, with
good robes and vestments, O son of Kuru, and with all articles competent
to contribute to one's pleasure and happiness. Righteous men of righteous
deeds should make such gifts, impelled by the motive that it is their
duty to act in that way and not from desire of reaping any rewards
therefrom. Verily good men should act in this way so that the virtuous
men described above might not, O Yudhishthira, feel any disinclination to
accept those gifts sanctified by devotion and faith. There are persons
bathed in learning and bathed in vows. Without depending upon anybody
they obtain their means of subsistence. These Brahmanas of rigid vows are
devoted to Vedic study and penances without proclaiming their practices
to any one. Whatever gifts thus mayst make unto those persons of pure
behaviour, of thorough mastery over their senses, and always contented
with their own wedded spouses in the matter of desire, are sure to win
for thee a merit that will accompany thee into all the worlds into which
thou mayst go. One reaps the same merit by making gifts unto regenerate
persons of restrained souls which one wins by properly pouring libations
unto the sacred fire morning and evening. Even this is the sacrifice
spread out for thee,--a sacrifice that is sanctified by devotion and
faith and that is endued with Dakshina. It is distinguished above all
other sacrifices. Let that sacrifice ceaselessly flow from thee as thou
givest away.[320] Performed in view of such men, O Yudhishthira, a
sacrifice in which the water that is sprinkled for dedicating gifts
constitutes the oblations in honour of the Pitris, and devotion and
worship rendered unto such superior men, serves to free one of the debts
one owes to the deities.[321] Those persons that do not yield to wrath
and that never desire to take even a blade of grass belonging to others,
as also they that are of agreeable speech, deserve to receive from us the
most reverent worship. Such persons and others (because free from desire)
never pay their regards to the giver. Nor do they strive for obtaining
gifts. They should, however, be cherished by givers as they cherish their
own sons. I bend my head unto them. From them also both Heaven and Hell
may become one's.[322] Ritwiks and Purohitas and preceptors, when
conversant with the Vedas and when behaving mildly towards disciples,
become such. Without doubt, Kshatriya energy loses its force upon a
Brahmana when it encounters him. Thinking that thou art a king, that thou
art possessed of great power, and that thou hast affluence, do not, O
Yudhishthira, enjoy thy affluence without giving anything unto the
Brahmanas. Observing the duties of thy own order, do thou worship the
Brahmanas with whatever wealth thou hast, O sinless one, for purposes of
adornment or sustaining thy power. Let the Brahmanas live in whatever way
they like. Thou shouldst always bend thy head unto them with reverence.
Let them always rejoice in thee as thy children, living happily and
according to their wishes. Who else than thou, O best of the Kurus, is
competent to provide the means of subsistence for such Brahmanas as are
endued with eternal contentment as are thy well-wishers, and as are
gratified by only a little? As women have one eternal duty, in this
world, viz., dependence upon and obedient service to their husbands, and
as such duty constitutes their only end, even so is the service to
Brahmanas Our eternal duty and end. If, at sight of cruelties and other
sinful acts in Kshatriyas, the Brahmanas, O son, unhonoured by us,
forsake us all, I say, of what use would life be to us, in the absence of
all contact with the Brahmanas, especially as we shall then have to drag
on our existence without being able to study the Vedas to perform
sacrifices, to hope for worlds of bliss hereafter, and to achieve great
feats? I shall, in this connection, tell thee what the eternal usage is.
In days of yore, O king, the Kshatriyas used to serve the Brahmanas. The
Vaisya in a similar manner used in those days to worship the royal order,
and the Sudra to worship the Vaisya. Even this is what is heard. The
Brahmana was like a blazing fire. Without being able to touch him or
approach his presence, the Sudra used to serve the Brahmana from a
distance. It was only the Kshatriya and the Vaisya who could serve the
Brahmana by touching his person or approaching his presence. The
Brahmanas are endued with a mild disposition. They are truthful in
behaviour. They are followers of the true religion. When angry, they are
like snakes of virulent poison. Such being their nature, do thou, O
Yudhishthira, serve and attend upon them with obedience and reverence.
The Brahmanas are superior to even those that are higher than the high
and the low. The energy and penances of even those Kshatriyas who blaze
forth with energy and might, become powerless and neutralised when they
come in contact with the Brahmanas. My sire himself is not dearer to me
than the Brahmanas. My mother is not dearer to me than they. My
grandsire, O king, is not dearer, my own self is not dearer, my life
itself is not dearer, O king, to me than the Brahmanas! On earth there is
nothing, O Yudhishthira, that is dearer to me than thou. But, O chief of
Bharata's race, the Brahmanas are dearer to me than even thou. I tell
thee truly, O son of Pandu! I swear by this truth, by which I hope to
acquire all those regions of bliss that have been Santanu's. I behold
those sacred regions with Brahma shining conspicuously before them. I
shall repair thither, O son, and reside in them for unending days.
Beholding these regions, O best of the Bharatas (with my spiritual eyes),
I am filled with delight at the thought of all these acts which I have
done in aid and honour of the Brahmanas, O monarch!'"



SECTION LX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Unto which of two Brahmanas, when both happen to be
equally pure in behaviour, equally possessed of learning and purity, of
birth and blood, but differing from each other in only this, viz., the
one solicits and the other does not,--I ask, O grandsire, unto which of
these two would a gift be more meritorious?"

"Bhishma said, 'It has been said. O son of Pritha, that a gift made unto
an unsoliciting person is productive of greater merit than one made to a
person who solicits. One possessed of contentment is certainly more
deserving than that person who is destitute of that virtue and is,
therefore, helpless amidst the storms and buffets of the world. The
firmness of a Kshatriya consists in the protection he gives to others.
The firmness of a Brahmana consists in his refusal to solicit. The
Brahmana possessed of steadiness and learning and contentment gladdens
the deities. The wise have said that an act of solicitation on the part
of a poor man is a great reproach. Those persons that solicit others are
said to annoy the world like thieves and robbers.[323] The person who
solicits is said to meet with death. The giver, however, is said not to
meet with death. The giver is said to grant life unto him who solicits.
By an act of gift, O Yudhishthira, the giver is said to rescue his own
self also. Compassion is a very high virtue. Let people make gift from
compassion unto those that solicit. Those, however, that do not beg, but
are plunged into poverty and distress should be respectfully invited to
receive assistance. If such Brahmanas, who must be regarded as the
foremost of their order, live in thy kingdom, thou shouldst regard them
as fire covered with ashes. Blazing with penances, they are capable of
consuming the whole earth. Such persons, O son of Kuru's race, though not
generally worshipped, should still be regarded as deserving of worship in
every way. Endued with knowledge and spiritual vision and penances and
Yoga, such persons always deserve our worship. O scorcher of foes, do
thou always offer worship unto such Brahmanas. One should repair of one's
own accord unto those foremost of Brahmanas that do not solicit anybody
and make unto them gifts of diverse kinds of wealth in abundance. The
merit that flows from properly pouring libations into the sacred fire
every morning and evening is won by the person who makes gifts unto a
Brahmana endued with learning, with the Vedas and with high and excellent
vows. Thou shouldst, O son of Kunti, invite those foremost of Brahmanas
who are cleansed by learning and the Vedas and vows, who live in
independence, whose Vedic studies and penances are hidden without being
proclaimed from the house-top, and who are observant of excellent vows,
and honour them with gifts of well-constructed and delightful houses
equipped with servitors and robes and furniture, and with all other
articles of pleasure and enjoyment. Conversant with all duties and
possessed of minute vision, those foremost of Brahmanas, O Yudhishthira,
may accept the gifts offered to them with devotion and respect, thinking
that they should not refuse and disappoint the giver. Thou shouldst
invite those Brahmanas whose wives wait for their return like tillers in
expectation of rain. Having fed them well thou shouldst make gifts of
additional food unto them so that upon their return home their expectant
wives might be able to distribute that food among their children that had
clamoured for food but that had been pacified with promises Brahmacharins
of restrained senses, O son, by eating at one's house in the forenoon,
cause the three sacrificial fires to be gratified with the householder at
whose house they eat. Let the sacrifice of gift proceed in thy house at
midday, O son, and do thou also give away kine and gold and robes (unto
thy guests after feeding them well). By conducting thyself, in this way,
thou art sure to gratify the chief of the celestials himself. That would
constitute thy third sacrifice, O Yudhishthira, in which offerings are
made unto the deities, the Pitris, and the Brahmanas. By such sacrifice
thou art sure to gratify the Viswedevas. Let compassion unto all
creatures, giving unto all creatures what is due unto them, restraining
the senses, renunciation, steadiness, and truth, constitute the final
bath of that sacrifice which is constituted by gift. Even this is the
sacrifice that is spread out for thee,--a sacrifice that is sanctified by
devotion and faith, and that has a large Dakshina attached to it. This
sacrifice which is constituted by gift is distinguished above all other
sacrifices, O son, let this sacrifice be always performed by thee.'"



SECTION LXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'I wish to know in detail, O Bharata, where one meets
with the high rewards of gifts and sacrifices. Are those rewards earned
here or are they to come hereafter? Which amongst these two (viz., Gift
and Sacrifice) is said to be productive of superior merit? Unto whom
should gifts be made? In what manner are gifts and sacrifices to be made?
When also are they to be made? I ask thee all these. O learned sire! Do
thou discourse to me on the duty of gifts! Do tell me, O grandsire, what
leads to the highest reward, viz., gifts made from the sacrificial
platform or those made out of that place?[324]

'Bhishma said, 'O son, a Kshatriya is generally employed in deeds of
fierceness. In his case, sacrifices and gifts are regarded as cleansing
or sanctifying him. They, that are good and righteous, do not accept the
gifts of persons of the royal order, who are given to sinful acts. For
this reason, the king should perform sacrifices with abundant gifts in
the form of Dakshina.[325] If the good and righteous would accept the
gifts made unto them, the Kshatriya, O monarch, should incessantly make
gifts with devotion and faith unto them. Gifts are productive of great
merit, and are highly cleansing. Observant of vows, one should perform
sacrifices and gratify with wealth such Brahmanas as are friends of all
creatures, possessed of righteousness, conversant with the Vedas, and
preeminent for acts, conduct, and penances. If such Brahmanas do not
accept thy gifts, no merit becomes thine. Do thou perform sacrifices with
copious Dakshina, and make gifts of good and agreeable food unto those
that are righteous. By making an act of gift thou shouldst regard thyself
as performing a sacrifice. Thou shouldst with gifts adore those Brahmanas
who perform sacrifices. By doing this thou will acquire a share in the
merits of those sacrifices of theirs. Thou shouldst support such
Brahmanas as are possessed of children and as are capable of sending
people to Heaven. By conducting thyself in this way thou art sure to get
a large progeny--in fact as large a progeny as the Prajapati himself.
They that are righteous support and advance the cause of all righteous
acts. One should, by giving up one's all, support such men, as also those
that do good unto all creatures. Thyself being in the enjoyment of
affluence, do thou, O Yudhishthira, make unto Brahmanas gifts of kine and
bullocks and food and umbrellas, and robes and sandals or shoes Do thou
give unto sacrificing Brahmanas clarified butter, as also food and cars
and vehicles with horses harnessed thereto, and dwelling houses and
mansions and beds. Such gifts are fraught with prosperity and affluence
to the giver, and are regarded as pure, O Bharata. Those Brahmanas that
are not censurable for anything they do, and that have no means of
support assigned to them, should be searched out. Covertly or publicly do
thou cherish such Brahmanas by assigning them the means of support. Such
conduct always confers higher benefit upon Kshatriyas than the Rajasuya
and the Horse-sacrifices. Cleansing thyself of sin, thou art sure of
attaining to Heaven. Filling thy treasury thou shouldst do good to thy
kingdom. By such conduct thou art sure to win much wealth and become a
Brahmana (in thy next life). Do thou, O Bharata, protect thy own means
(of support and of doing acts of righteousness), as also the means of
other people's subsistence. Do thou support thy servants as thy own
children. Do thou, O Bharata, protect the Brahmanas in the enjoyment of
what they have and make gifts unto them of such articles as they have
not. Let thy life be devoted to the purpose of the Brahmanas. Let it
never be said that thou dost not grant protection to the Brahmanas. Much
wealth or affluence, when possessed by a Brahmana, becomes a source of
evil to him. Constant association with affluence and prosperity is
certain to fill him with pride and cause him to be stupefied (in respect
of his true duties). If the Brahmanas become stupefied and steeped in
folly, righteousness and duties are sure to suffer destruction. Without
doubt, if righteousness and duty come to an end, it will lead to the
destruction of all creatures. That king who having amassed wealth makes
it over (for safe keep) to his treasury officers and guards, and then
commences again to plunder his kingdom, saying unto his officers, 'Do ye
bring me as much wealth as you can extort from the kingdom,' and who
spends the wealth that is thus collected at his command under
circumstances of fear and cruelty, in the performance of sacrifices,
should know that those sacrifices of his are never applauded by the
righteous. The king should perform sacrifices with such wealth as is
willingly paid into his treasury by prosperous and unpersecuted subjects.
Sacrifices should never be performed with wealth acquired by severity and
extortion. The king should then perform great sacrifices with large
presents in the shape of Dakshina, when in consequence of his being
devoted to the good of his subjects, the latter bathe him with copious
showers of wealth brought willingly by them for the purpose. The king
should protect the wealth of those that are old, of those that are
minors, of those that are blind, and of those that are otherwise
disqualified. The king should never take any wealth from his people, if
they, in a season of drought, succeed in growing any corn with the aid of
water obtained from wells. Nor should he take any wealth from weeping
women.[326] The wealth taken from the poor and the helpless is sure to
destroy the kingdom and the prosperity of the king. The king should
always make unto the righteous gifts of all enjoyable articles in
abundance. He should certainly dispel the fear of famishing which those
men may have.[327] There are no men more sinful than those upon whose
food children look with wistfulness without being able to eat them duly.
If within thy kingdom any learned Brahmana languishes with hunger like
any of those children, thou shalt then incur the sin of foeticide for
having allowed such an act. King Sivi himself had said this, viz., 'Fie
on that king in whose kingdom a Brahmana or even any other man languishes
from hunger.' That kingdom in which a Brahmana of the Snataka class
languishes with hunger becomes overwhelmed with adversity. Such a kingdom
with its king also incurs reproach. That king is more dead than alive in
whose kingdom women are easily abducted from the midst of husbands and
sons, uttering cries and groans of indignation and grief The subjects
should arm themselves to slay that King who does not protect them, who
simply plunders their wealth, who confounds all distinctions, who is ever
incapable of taking their lead, who is without compassion, and who is
regarded as the most sinful of kings. That king who tells his people that
he is their protector but who does not or is unable to protect them,
should be slain by his combined subjects, like a dog that is affected
with the rabies and has become mad. A fourth part of whatever sins are
committed by the subjects clings to that king who does not protect, O
Bharata. Some authorities say that the whole of those sins is taken by
such a king. Others are of opinion that a half thereof becomes his.
Bearing in mind, however, the declaration of Manu, it is our opinion that
a fourth part of such sins becomes the unprotecting king's. That king, O
Bharata, who grants protection to his subjects obtains a fourth part of
whatever merits his subjects acquire living under his protection. Do
thou, O Yudhishthira, act in such a way that all thy subjects may seek
thee as their refuge as long as thou art alive, even as all creatures
seek the refuge of the deity of rain or even as the winged denizens of
the air seek the refuge of a large tree. Let all thy kinsmen and all thy
friends and well-wishers, O scorcher of foes, seek thee as their refuge
even as the Rakshasas seek Kuvera or the deities seek Indra as theirs.'"



SECTION LXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'People accept with affection the declarations of the
Srutis which say, 'This is to be given.' 'This other thing is to be
given!' As regards kings, again, they make gifts of various things unto
various men. What, however, O grandsire, is the best or foremost of all
gifts.'

"Bhishma said, 'Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of earth has been said to
be the first (in point of merit). Earth is immovable and indestructible.
It is capable of yielding unto him who owns it all the best things upon
which his heart may be set. It yields robes and vestments, jewels and
gems, animals, paddy and barley. Amongst all creatures, the giver of
earth grows in prosperity for ever and ever. As long as the earth lasts,
so long does the giver thereof grow in prosperity. There is no gift that
is higher, O Yudhishthira, than the gift of earth. It hath been heard by
us that all men have given a little quantity of earth. All men have made
gifts of earth, hence all men enjoy a little of earth. Whether in this or
in the next world all creatures live under conditions dependent upon
their own acts. Earth is Prosperity's self. She is a mighty goddess. She
makes him her lord (in next life) who makes gifts of her in this life to
other people. That person, O best of kings, who gives away earth, which
is indestructible, as Dakshina, becomes born in next life as a man and
becomes also a lord of earth. The measure of one's enjoyment in this life
is commensurate with the measure of one's gifts in a previous life. Even
this is the conclusion to which the scriptures point. For a Kshatriya
should either give away the earth in gift or cast off his life in battle.
Even this constitutes the highest source of prosperity with regard to
Kshatriyas. It has been heard by us that earth, when given away, cleanses
and sanctifies the giver. The man that is of sinful behaviour, that is
guilty of even the slaughter of a Brahamana and of falsehood, is cleansed
by a gift of earth. Indeed, such a gift rescues even such a sinner from
all his sins. The righteous accept gifts of earth only and no other thing
from kings that are sinful. Like one's mother, earth, when given away,
cleanses the giver and the taker. This is an eternal and secret name of
earth, viz., Priyadatta.[328] Given away or accepted in gift, the name
that is dear to her is Priyadatta. The gift of earth is desirable. That
king who makes a gift of earth unto a learned Brahmana, obtains from that
gift a kingdom. Upon re-birth in this world, such a man without doubt
attains to a position that is equal to that of a king. Hence a king as
soon as he gets earth, should make gifts of earth unto the Brahmanas.
None but a lord of earth; is competent to make gifts of earth. Nor should
one that is not a deserving person accept a gift of earth. They who
desire earth should, without doubt, conduct themselves in this way (i.e.,
make gifts of earth). That person who takes away earth belonging to a
righteous person never gets any earth. By making gifts of earth unto the
righteous, one gets good earth. Of virtuous soul, such a giver acquires
great fame both here and hereafter. That righteous king respecting whom
the Brahmanas say, 'We live on earth given to us by him,' is such that
his very enemies cannot utter the least reproach respecting his
kingdom.[329] Whatever sins a man commits from want of the means of
support, are all washed off by gift of only so much earth as is covered
by a cow-hide. Those kings that are mean in their acts or are of fierce
deeds, should be taught that gift of earth is exceedingly cleansing and
is at the same time the highest gift (in respect of merit). The ancients
thought that there was always very little difference between the man who
performs a Horse-sacrifice and him that makes a gift of earth unto one
that is righteous. The learned doubt the acquisition of merit by doing
all other acts of righteousness. The only act with respect to which they
do not entertain doubt is the gift of earth which, indeed, is the
foremost of all gifts. The man of wisdom who makes gifts of earth, gives
away all these, viz., gold, silver, cloth, gems and pearls and precious
stones. Penances, sacrifice, Vedic lore, good behaviour, absence of
cupidity, firmness in truth, worship of seniors, preceptors, and the
deities--all these dwell in him who makes a gift of earth. They who
ascend to the region of Brahman by leaving off their lives in battle,
after having fought without any regard for themselves to secure the
benefit to their masters--even they are unable to transcend the merit of
those that make gilts of earth. As the mother always nourishes her own
child with milk from her breast, even so doth the earth gratify with all
the tastes the person that makes a gift of earth. Mrityu, Vaikinkara,
Danda, Yama, Fire who is possessed of great fierceness, and all heinous
and terrible sins are incapable of touching the person that makes a gift
of earth. That man of tranquil soul who makes a gift of earth gratifies
(by that act) the Pitris dwelling in their own region and the deities
also hailing from the region that is theirs. The man who makes a gift of
earth unto one that is emaciated and cheerless and destitute of the means
of life and languishing with weakness, and who thereby supplies one with
the means of subsistence, becomes entitled to the honour and merit of
performing a sacrifice. Even as an affectionate cow runs towards her
calf, with full udders dropping milk, the highly-blessed earth after the
same manner, runs towards the person who makes a gift of earth. That man
who makes unto a Brahmana a gift of earth which has been tilled, or sown
with seeds or which contains standing crops, or a mansion well-equipped
with every necessary, succeeds in becoming (in next life) the
accomplisher of the wishes of everybody. The man who causes a Brahmana
possessed of the means of life, owning a domestic fire and of pure vows
and practices, to accept a gift of earth, never falls into any danger or
distress. As the moon waxes day by day, even so the merit of a gift of
earth becomes enhanced every time such earth produces crops. Those
conversant with ancient history sing this verse in connection with the
gift of earth. Hearing that verse Jamadagni's son (Rama) gave away the
whole earth unto Kasyapa. The verse to which I refer is this, 'Receive me
in gift. Give me away. By giving me away, thou (O giver) shall obtain me
again!' That which is given away in this life is re-acquired in the
next.[330] That Brahmana who recites this high declaration of the Vedas
at the time of a Sraddha attains to the highest reward. A gift of earth
is a high expiation for the sin of those puissant men who betake
themselves to Atharvan rites for doing injuries to others. Indeed, by
making a gift of earth one rescues ten generations of one's paternal and
maternal race. That person who is even conversant with this Vedic
declaration respecting the merits of a gift of earth, succeeds in
rescuing ten generations of both his paternal and maternal families. The
earth is the original source of all creatures (for it is from earth that
all creatures derive their sustenance). It has been said that the deity
of fire is the presiding genius of the earth. After the coronation
ceremony has been performed of a king, this Vedic declaration should be
re-cited to him, so that he may make gifts of earth and may never take
away earth from a righteous person. Without doubt, the entire wealth
owned by the king belongs to the Brahmanas. A king well-conversant with
the science of duty and morality is the first requisite of the kingdom's
prosperity. Those people whose king is unrighteous and atheistic in
conduct and belief can never be happy. Such people can never sleep or
wake in peace. In consequence of his acts of wickedness his subjects
become always filled with anxiety. Protection of what the subjects
already have and new acquisitions according to lawful means are incidents
that are not noticeable in the kingdom of such a ruler. Those people,
again, who have a wise and righteous king, sleep happily and wake up in
happiness. Through the blessed and righteous acts of such a king, his
subjects become freed from anxiety. The subjects, restrained from wicked
acts, grow in prosperity through their own conduct. Capable of retaining
what they have, they go on making new acquisitions. That king who makes
gifts of earth is regarded as well-born. He is regarded as a man. He is a
friend. He is righteous in his acts. He is a giver. He is regarded as
possessing prowess. Those men who make gifts of ample and fertile earth
unto Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas, always shine in the world, in
consequence of their energy, like so many suns. As seeds scattered on the
soil grow and return a goodly crop, even so all one's wishes become
crowned with fruition in consequence of one's making gifts of earth.
Aditya and Varuna and Vishnu and Brahman and Soma and Hutasana, and the
illustrious and trident-bearing Mahadeva, all applaud the man that makes
a gift of earth. Living creatures spring into life from the earth and it
is into the earth that they become merged when they disappear. Living
creatures which are distributed into four classes (i.e., viviparous,
oviparous, filthborn, and vegetables) have earth for their constituent
essence. The earth is both the mother and father of the universe of
creatures, O monarch. There is no element, O ruler of men, that can
compare with earth. In this connection is cited the old narrative of a
discourse between the celestial preceptor Vrihaspati and Indra the ruler
of Heaven, O Yudhishthira. Having adored Vishnu in a hundred sacrifices
each of which was distinguished by plentiful gifts as Dakshina, Maghavat
put this question to Vrihaspati, that foremost of all eloquent persons.'

"Maghavat said, 'O illustrious one, by what gift does one succeed in
coming to Heaven and attaining to beatitude? O foremost of speakers, do
thou tell me of that gift which is productive of high and inexhaustible
merit.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by the chief of the celestials the
preceptor of the deities, viz., Vrihaspati of great energy, said these
words in reply unto him of a hundred sacrifices. Endued as he is with the
merits that attach to the gift of earth, the region of felicity reserved
for the person who makes gift of such earth as is auspicious and rich
with every taste, never become exhausted.[331] That king, O Sakra, who
desires to have prosperity and who wishes to win happiness for himself,
should always make gifts of earth, with due rites, unto deserving
persons. If after committing numerous sins a person makes gifts of earth
unto members of the regenerate class, he casts off all those sins like a
snake casting off its slough. The person that makes a gift of earth is
said to make gifts of everything, that is, of seas and rivers and
mountains and forests. By making a gift of earth, the person is said to
give away lakes and tanks and wells and streams. In consequence of the
moisture of earth, one is said to give away articles of diverse tastes by
making a gift of earth. The man who makes a gift of earth is regarded as
giving away herbs and plants possessed of high and efficacious virtues,
trees adorned with flowers and fruit, delightful woods, and hillocks. The
merit that a person acquires by making a gift of earth is incapable of
being acquired by the performance of even such great sacrifices as the
Agnishtoma and others with plentiful gifts in the shape of Dakshina. The
giver of earth, it has been already said, rescues ten generations of both
his paternal and maternal races. Similarly, by taking away earth that was
given away, one hurls oneself into hell and casts ten generations of both
one's paternal and maternal lines into the same place of misery. That man
who having promised to make a gift of earth does not actually make it, or
who having made a gift takes it back, has to pass a long time, in great
misery in consequence of being tied with the noose of Varuna at the
command of Death. Those men have never to go to Yama who honour and
worship those foremost of Brahmanas that pour libations every day on
their domestic fire, that are always engaged in the performance of
sacrifices, that have scanty means of livelihood, and that receive with
hospitality every guest seeking shelter in their abodes The king, O
Purandara, should free himself from the debt he owes to the Brahmanas and
protect the helpless and the weak belonging to the other orders. The king
should never resume, O chief of the deities, earth that has been given
away by another unto a Brahmana, O ruler of the celestials, that is
destitute of the means of life.[332] The tears that would fall from the
eyes of such cheerless and destitute Brahmanas in consequence of their
lands being taken back are capable of destroying the ancestors and
descendants to the third generation of the resumer. That man who succeeds
by his endeavours in re-establishing a king driven away from his kingdom,
obtains residence in heaven and is much honoured by the denizens thereof.
That king who succeeds in making gifts of earth with such crops standing
thereon as sugar-cane or barley or wheat, or with kine and horses and
other draft cattle,--earth that has been won with the might of the
giver's arms,--that has mineral wealth in its bowels and that is covered
with every kind of wealth of the surface, wins inexhaustible regions of
felicity in the next world, and such a king it is that is said to perform
the earth-sacrifice. That king who makes a gift of earth becomes washed
of every sin and is, therefore, pure and approved of the righteous. In
this world he is highly honoured and applauded by all righteous men. The
merit that attaches to a gift of earth increases every time the earth
given away bears crops for the benefit of the owner, even as a drop of
oil, falling upon water, is seen to extend on every side, and cover the
watery surface. Those heroic kings and ornaments of assemblies who cast
off their lives in battle with faces towards the foe, attain, O Sakra, to
the region of Brahman. Beautiful damsels skilled in music and dancing and
adorned with garlands of celestial flowers, approach, O chief of the
deities, the giver of earth as he comes to heaven departing from the
earth. That king who makes gifts of earth with due rites unto persons of
the regenerate order, sports in bliss in the celestial regions, adorned
all the while by the deities and Gandharvas. A century of Apsaras,
adorned with celestial garlands, approach, O chief of the deities, the
giver of earth as he ascends to the region of Brahman. Flowers of
excellent perfumes, an excellent conch and excellent seat, an umbrella
and excellent steeds with excellent vehicles, are always ready for the
person how makes gifts of earth. By making gifts of earth a king can
always command flowers of excellent perfumes and heaps of gold. Possessed
of all kinds of wealth the commands of such a king can never be disobeyed
anywhere, and cries of victory hail him wheresoever he may approach. The
rewards that attach to gifts of earth consist of residence in heaven, O
Purandara, and gold, and flowers, and plants and herbs of medicinal
virtue, and Kusa and mineral wealth and verdant grass. A person by making
a gift of earth acquires in his next life nectar yielding earth. There is
no gift that is equal to a gift of earth. There is no senior worthy of
greater respect than the mother. There is no duty higher than truth.
There is no wealth more precious than that which is given away.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words from the son of Angiras, Vasava
made a gift unto him of the whole earth with all her jewels and gems and
all her wealth of diverse kinds. If these verses declaring the merit
attaching to gifts of earth be recited on the occasion of a Sraddha,
neither Rakshasas nor Asuras can succeed in appropriating any share of
the offerings made in it. Without doubt, the offerings one makes unto the
Pitris at such a Sraddha become inexhaustible. Hence, on occasions of
Sraddhas, the man of learning should recite these verses on the subject
of the merits that attach to gifts of earth, in the presence and hearing
of the invited Brahmanas when engaged in eating. I have thus, O chief of
the Bharatas, discoursed unto thee of that gift which is the foremost of
all gifts. What else dost thou wish to hear?'"



SECTION LXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'When a king becomes desirous of making gifts in this
world, what, indeed, are those gifts which he should make, O best of the
Bharatas, unto such Brahmanas as are possessed of superior
accomplishments? What gift is that by which the Brahmanas become
immediately gratified? What fruits do they bestow in return? O thou of
mighty arms, tell me what is the high reward attainable through the merit
arising from gifts. What gifts, O king, are productive of rewards both
here and hereafter? I desire to hear all this from thee. Do thou
discourse to me on all this in detail.'

"Bhishma said, 'These very questions were on a former occasion put by me
to Narada of celestial appearance. Hear me as I recite to thee what that
celestial sage told me in reply.'

"Narada said, 'The deities and all the Rishis applaud food. The course of
the world and the intellectual faculties have all been established on
food. There has never been, nor will be any gift that is equal to the
gifts of food. Hence, men always desire particularly to make gifts of
food. In this world, food is the cause of energy and strength. The
life-breaths are established on food. It is food that upholds the wide
universe, O puissant one. All classes of men, householders and mendicants
and ascetics, exist, depending upon food. The life-breaths depend upon
food. There is no doubt in this. Afflicting (if need be) one's relatives,
one is desirous of one's own prosperity, should make gifts of food unto a
high-souled Brahmana or a person of the mendicant order. That man who
makes a gift of food unto an accomplished Brahmana who solicits the same,
secures for himself in the world to come wealth of great value. The
householder who is desirous of his own prosperity should receive with
reverence a deserving old man that is spent with toil while proceeding on
his way far from home, when such a man honours the householder's abode
with his presence. That man who, casting off wrath that overleaps every
bound and becoming righteous in disposition and freed from malice, makes
gifts of food, is sure to attain to happiness, O king, both here and
hereafter. The householder should never disregard the man that comes to
his abode, nor should he insult him by sending him away. A gift of food
made unto even a Chandala or a dog is never lost. That man who makes a
gift of clean food unto a person on the way who is toil-worn and unknown
to the giver, is sure to acquire great merit. The man who gratifies with
gifts of food the Pitris, the deities, the Rishis, the Brahmanas, and
guests arrived at his abode, acquires merit whose measure is very large.
That person who having committed even a heinous sin makes a gift of food
unto one that solicits, or unto a Brahmana, is never stupefied by that
heinous sin. A gift of food made unto a Brahmana becomes inexhaustible.
One made to a Sudra becomes productive of great merit. Even this is the
difference between the merits that attach to gifts of food made unto
Brahmanas and Sudras. Solicited by it Brahmana, one should not enquire
about his race or conduct or Vedic lore. Asked for food, one should give
food to him that asks. There is no doubt in tits, O king, that he who
makes gifts of food obtains both here and hereafter many trees yielding
food and every other object of desire. Like tillers expecting auspicious
showers of rain, the Pitris always expect that their sons and grandsons
would make offerings unto them of food (in Sraddhas). The Brahmana is a
great being. When he comes into one's anode and solicits, saying, 'Give
me,' the owner of the abode, whether influenced or not by the desire of
acquiring merit, is sure to win great merit by listening to that
solicitation. The Brahmana is the guest of all creatures in the universe.
He is entitled to the first portion of every food. That house Increases
in prosperity to which the Brahmanas repair from desire of soliciting
alms and from which they return honoured in consequence of their desires
being fulfilled. The owner of such a house takes birth in his next life
in a family, O Bharata, that can command all the comforts and luxuries of
life. A man, by making gifts of food in this world, is sure to attain to
an excellent place hereafter. He who makes gifts of sweetmeat and all
food that is sweet, attains to a residence in heaven where he is honoured
by all the deities and other denizens. Food constitutes the life-breath
of men. Everything is established upon food. He who makes gifts of food
obtains many animals (as his wealth), many children, considerable wealth
(in other shape), and a command in abundance of all articles of comfort
and luxurious enjoyment. The giver of food is said to be the giver of
life. Indeed, he is said to be the giver of everything. Hence, O king,
such a man acquires both strength and beauty of form in this world. If
food be given duly unto a Brahmana arrived at the giver's house as a
guest, the giver attains to great happiness, and is adored by the very
deities. The Brahmana, O Yudhishthira, is a great being. He is also a
fertile field. Whatever seed is sown on that field produces an abundant
crop of merit. A gift of food is visibly and immediately productive of
the happiness of both the giver and the receiver. All other gifts produce
fruits that are unseen. Food is the origin of all creatures. From food,
comes happiness and delight. O Bharata, know that religion and wealth
both flow from food. The cure of disease or health also flows from food.
In a former Kalpa, the Lord of all creatures said that food is Amrita or
the source of immortality. Food is Earth, food is Heaven, food is the
Firmament. Everything is established on food. In the absence of food, the
five elements that constitute the physical organism cease to exist in a
state of union. From absence of food the strength of even the strongest
man is seen to fail. Invitations and marriages and sacrifices all cease
in the absence of food. The very Vedas disappear when food there is none.
Whatever mobile and immobile creatures exist in the universe are
dependent on food. Religion and wealth, in the three worlds, are all
dependent on food. Hence the wise should make gifts of food. The
strength, energy, fame and achievements of the man who makes gifts of
food, constantly increase in the three worlds, O king. The lord of the
life-breaths, viz., the deity of wind, places above the clouds (the water
sucked up by the Sun). The water thus borne to the clouds is caused by
Sakra to be poured upon the earth, O Bharata. The Sun, by means of his
rays, sucks up the moisture of the earth. The deity of wind causes the
moisture to fall down from the Sun.[333] When the water falls down from
the clouds upon the Earth, the goddess Earth becomes moist, O Bharata.
Then do people sow diverse kinds of crops upon whose outturn the universe
of creatures depends. It is in the food thus produced that the flesh,
fat, bones and vital seed of all beings have their origin. From the vital
seed thus originated, O king, spring diverse kinds of living creatures.
Agni and Soma, the two agents living within the body, create and maintain
the vital seed. Thus from food, the Sun and the deity of wind and the
vital seed spring and act. All these are said to constitute one element
or quantity, and it is from these that all creatures spring. That man who
gives food into one who comes into his house and solicits it, is said, O
chief of the Bharatas, to contribute both life and energy unto living
creatures.'

'Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by Narada, O king, I have always made
gifts of food. Do thou also, therefore, freed from malice and with a
cheerful heart, make gifts of food. By making gifts of food, O king, unto
deserving Brahmanas with due rites, thou mayst be sure, O puissant one,
of attaining to Heaven. Hear me, O monarch, as I tell thee what the
regions are that are reserved for those that make gifts of food. The
mansions of those high-souled persons shine with resplendence in the
regions of Heaven. Bright as the stars in the firmament, and supported
upon many columns, white as the disc of the moon, and adorned with many
tinkling bells, and rosy like the newly-risen sun, those palatial abodes
are either fixed or movable. Those mansions are filled with hundreds upon
hundreds of things and animals that live on land and as many things and
animals living in water. Some of them are endued with the effulgence of
lapis lazuli and some are possessed of the resplendence of the sun. Some
of them are made of silver and some of gold. Within those mansions are
many trees capable of crowning with fruition every desire of the inmates.
Many tanks and roads and halls and well and lakes occur all around.
Thousands of conveyances with horses and other animals harnessed thereto
and with wheels whose clatter is always loud, may be seen there.
Mountains of food and all enjoyable articles and heaps of cloths and
ornaments are also to be seen there. Numerous rivers that run milk, and
hills of rice and other edibles, may also be seen there. Indeed, many
palatial residences looking like white clouds, with many beds of golden
splendour, occur in those regions, All these are obtained by those men
that make gifts of food in this world. Do thou, therefore, become a giver
of food. Verily, these are the regions that are reserved for those
high-souled and righteous persons that make gifts of food in this world.
For these reasons, men should always make gifts of food in this world.'"



SECTION LXIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard the discourse regarding the ordinance
about the gift of food. Do thou discourse to me now about the conjunction
of the planets and the stars in relation to the subject of making
gifts.[334]

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited this ancient narrative of
the discourse between Devaki and Narada, that foremost of Rishis. Once on
a time when Narada of godlike feature and conversant with every duty
arrived at Dwaraka, Devaki asked him this question. Unto her that had
asked him, the celestial Rishi Narada duly answered in the following
words. Do thou hear as I recite them.'

"Narada said, 'By gratifying, O blessed lady, deserving Brahmanas with
Payasa mixed with ghee, under the constellation Krittika one attains to
regions of great happiness.[335] Under the constellation Rohini, one
should for freeing oneself from the debt one owes to the Brahmanas make
gift unto them of many handfuls of venison along with rice and ghee and
milk, and other kinds of edibles and drinks. One giving away a cow with a
calf under the constellation called Somadaivata (or Mrigasiras), proceeds
from this region of human beings to a region in heaven of great felicity.
One undergoing a fast and giving away Krisara mixed with sesame,
transcends all difficulties in the next world, including those mountains
with rocks sharp as razors. By making gifts, O beautiful lady, of cakes
and other food under the constellation Punarvasu one becomes possessed of
personal beauty and great fame and takes birth in one's next life in a
family in which there is abundance of food. Making a gift of wrought or
unwrought gold, under the constellation Pushya, one shines in effulgence
like Soma himself in regions of surrounding gloom. He who makes a gift,
under the constellation Aslesha, of silver of a bull, becomes freed from
every fear and attains to great affluence and prosperity. By making a
gift, under the constellation Magha, of earthen dishes filled with
sesame, one becomes possessed of children and animals in this world and
attains to felicity in the next.[336] For making gifts unto Brahmanas,
under the constellation called Purva-Phalguni of food mixed with Phanita
the giver observing a fast the while, reward is great prosperity both
here and hereafter.[337] By making a gift, under the constellation called
Uttara-Phalguni, of ghee and milk with rice called Shashthika, one
attains to great honours in heaven. Whatever gifts are made by men under
the constellation of Uttara-Phalguni produce great merit, which, again,
becomes inexhaustible. This is very certain. Observing a fast the while,
the person that makes, under the constellation Hasta, a gift of a car
with four elephants, attains to regions of great felicity that are
capable of granting the fruition of every wish. By making a gift, under
the constellation Chitra, of a bull and of good perfumes, one sports in
bliss in regions of Apsaras like the deities sporting in the woods of
Nandana. By making gifts of wealth under the constellation Swati, one
attains to such excellent regions as one desires and wins besides great
fame. By making gifts, under constellation Visakha, of a bull, and a cow
that yields a copious measure of milk, a cart full of paddy, with a
Prasanga for covering the same, and also cloths for wear,[338] a person
gratifies the Pitris and the deities attains to inexhaustible merit in
the other world. Such a person never meets with any calamity and
gratifies the Pitris and the deities and attains to inexhaustible merit
in the other world. Such a person never meets with any calamity and
certainly reaches heaven. By making gifts unto the Brahmanas of whatever
articles they solicit, one attains to such means of subsistence as one
desires, and becomes rescued from hell and every calamity that visits a
sinner after death. This is the certain conclusion of the scriptures. By
making gifts, under the constellation Anuradha of embroidered cloth and
other vestments and of food, observing a fast the while, one becomes
honoured in heaven for a hundred Yugas. By making a gift under the
constellation Jyeshtha, of the potherb called Kalasaka with the roots,
one attains to great prosperity as also to such an end as is desirable.
By making unto Brahmanas a gift under the constellation Mula, of fruits
and roots, with a restrained soul, one gratifies the Pitris and attains
to a desirable end. By making under the constellation Purvashadha, a
gift, unto a Brahmana conversant with the Vedas and of good family and
conduct, of cups filled with curds, while one is in the observance of a
fast, one takes birth in one's next life in a family possessed of
abundant kine. One obtains the fruition of every wish, by making gifts,
under the constellation Uttarashadha, of jugs full of barley-water, with
ghee and inspissated juice of sugarcane in abundance. By making a gift
under the conjunction called Abhijit, of milk with honey and ghee unto
men of wisdom, a righteous person attains to heaven and becomes an object
of attention and honour there. By making under the conjunction Sravana, a
gift of blankets or other cloth of thick texture, one roves freely
through every region of felicity, riding on a white car of pure
resplendence. By making with a restrained soul, under the constellation
Dhanishtha, a gift of a vehicle with bulls yoked thereto, or heaps of
cloths and wealth, one at once attains to heaven in one's next life. By
making gifts, under the constellation Satabhisha, of perfumes with
Aquilaria Agallocha and sandalwood, one attains in the next world to the
companionship of Apsaras as also eternal perfumes of diverse kinds. By
making gifts, under the constellation Purva-Bhadrapada, or Rajamasha, one
attains to great happiness in the next life and becomes possessed of an
abundant stock of every kind of edibles and fruits.[339] One who makes,
under the constellation Uttara, a gift of mutton, gratifies the Paris by
such an act attains to inexhaustible merit in the next world. Unto one
who makes a gift, under the constellation Revati, of a cow with a vessel
of white copper for milking her, the cow so given away approaches in the
next world, ready to grant the fruition of every wish. By making a gift,
under the constellation Aswini, of a car with steeds yoked thereto, one
is born in one's next life in a family possessed of numerous elephants
and steeds and cars, and becomes endued with great energy. By making,
under the constellation Bharani, a gift unto the Brahmanas of kine and
sesame, one acquires in one's next life great fame and an abundance of
kine.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Even thus did Narada discourse unto Devaki upon the
subject of what gifts should be made under what constellations. Devaki
herself, having listened to this discourse, recited it in her turn unto
her daughters-in-law (viz., the spouses of Krishna).'"



SECTION LXV

"Bhishma said, 'The illustrious Atri, the son of the Grandsire Brahman,
said, 'They who make gifts of gold are said to make gifts of everything
in the world.' King Harischandra said that the gift of gold is
sin-cleansing, leads to long life, and becomes productive of
inexhaustible merit unto the Pitris. Manu has said that a gift of drink
is the best of all gifts: therefore should a man cause wells and tanks
and lakes to be excavated. A well full of water and from which diverse
creatures draw water, is said to take off half the sinful acts of the
person who has excavated it. The whole race of a person is rescued from
hell and sin in whose well or tank or lake kine and Brahmanas and
righteous people constantly quench their thirst. That man transcends
every kind of calamity from whose well or tank every one draws water
without restraint during the summer season. Ghee is said to gratify the
illustrious Vrihaspati, Pushan, Bhaga, the twin Aswins, and the deity of
fire. Ghee is possessed of high medicinal virtues. It is a high requisite
for sacrifice. It is the best of all liquids. The merit a gift of ghee
produces is very superior. That man who is desirous of the reward of
happiness in the next world, who wishes for fame and prosperity, should
with a cleansed soul and having purified himself make gifts of ghee unto
the Brahmanas. Upon that man who makes gifts of ghee unto the Brahmanas
in the month of Aswin, the twin Aswins, gratified, confer personal
beauty. Rakshasas never invade the abode of that man who makes gifts unto
the Brahmanas of Payasa mixed with ghee. That man never dies of thirst
who makes gifts unto the Brahmanas of jars filled with water. Such a
person obtains every necessary of life in abundance, and has never to
undergo any calamity or distress. That man, who with great devotion and
restrained senses makes gifts unto the foremost of Brahmanas, is said to
take a sixth part of the merits won by the Brahmanas by their penances.
That man who makes presents unto Brahmanas having the means of life, of
firewood for purposes of cooking as also of enabling them to drive cold,
finds all his purposes and all his acts crowned with success. Such a one
is seen to shine with great splendour over all his enemies. The
illustrious deity of fire becomes pleased with such a man. As another
reward, he never becomes divested of cattle, and he is sure to achieve
victory in battles. The man who makes a gift of an umbrella obtains
children and great prosperity. Such a person is never affected by any
eye-disease. The merits also that spring from the performance of a
sacrifice become his. That man who makes a gift of an umbrella in the
season of summer or rains, has never to meet with any heart-burning on
any account. Such a man quickly succeeds in freeing himself from every
difficulty and impediment. The highly blessed and illustrious Rishi
Sandilya has said that, of all gifts, the gift of a car, O king, is the
best.'"



SECTION LXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'I desire to hear, O grandsire, what the merits are
of that person who makes the gift of a pair of sandals unto a Brahmana
whose feet are burning or being scorched by hot sand, while he is
walking.'

"Bhishma said, 'The man, that gives unto the Brahmanas sandals for the
protection of their feet, succeeds in crushing all thorns and gets over
every kind of difficulty. Such a man, O Yudhishthira, stays over the
heads of all his foes. Vehicles of pure splendour, with mules harnessed
thereto, and made of gold and silver, O monarch, approach him. He who
makes a gift of sandals is said to earn the merit of making the gift of a
vehicle with well-broken steeds yoked thereto.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou tell me in detail once more, O grandsire, of
the merits that attach to gifts of sesame and land and kine and food.'

"Bhishma said, 'Do thou hear, O son of Kunti, what the merits are that
attach to the gift of sesame. Hearing me, do thou, then, O best of the
Kurus, make gifts of sesame according to the ordinance. Sesame seeds were
created by the Self-born Brahman as the best food for the Pitris. Hence,
gifts of sesame seeds always gladden the Pitris greatly. The man who
makes gifts of sesame seeds, in the month of Magha, unto the Brahmanas,
has never to visit hell which abounds with all frightful creatures. He
who adores the Pitris with offerings of sesame seeds is regarded as
worshipping the deities at all the sacrifices. One should never perform a
Sraddha with offerings of sesame seeds without cherishing some
purpose.[340] Sesame seeds sprang from the limbs of the great Rishi
Kasyapa. Hence, in the matter of gifts, they have come to be regarded as
possessed of high efficacy. Sesame seeds bestow both prosperity and
personal beauty and cleans the giver of all his sins It is for this
reason that the gift of sesame seeds is distinguished above the gift of
every other article. Apastamva of great intelligence, and Kankha and
Likhita, and the great Rishi Gautama have all ascended to heaven by
having made gifts of sesame seeds. Those Brahmanas that make Homa with
offerings of sesame, abstain from sexual intercourse, and are observant
of the religion of Pravritti or acts, are regarded as equal (in purity
and efficacy) to bovine Havi. The gift of sesame seeds is distinguished
above all gifts. Amongst all gifts, the gifts of sesame is regarded as
productive of inexhaustible merit. In ancient times when Havi (clarified
butter) on one occasion had become unobtainable the Rishi Kusika, O
scorcher of foes, made offerings of sesame seeds to his three sacrificial
fires and succeeded in attaining to an excellent end. I have thus said
unto thee, O chief of the Kurus, what the regulations are respecting the
excellent gift of sesame seeds. It is in consequence of these regulations
that the gift of sesame seeds has come to be regarded as endued with very
superior merit. After this, listen to what I would say. Once on a time
the deities, desirous of making a sacrifice, repaired, O monarch, to the
presence of the Self-born Brahman. Having met Brahman, being desirous of
performing a sacrifice on earth, they begged him for a piece of
auspicious earth, saying, 'We want it for our sacrifice.'

'The deities said, 'O illustrious one, thou art the lord of all the earth
as also of all the deities. With thy permission, O highly blessed one, we
desire to perform a sacrifice. The person who has not obtained by lawful
means the earth whereon to make the sacrificial altar, earns not the
merit of the sacrifice he performs. Thou art the Lord of all the universe
consisting of its mobile and immobile objects. Hence, it behoveth thee to
grant us a piece of earth for the sacrifice we wish to make.'

"Brahman said, 'Ye foremost of deities, I shall give you a piece of earth
whereon, ye sons of Kasyapa, you shall perform your intended sacrifice.'

"The deities said, 'Our wishes, O holy one, have been crowned with
fruition. We shall perform our sacrifice even here with large Dakshina.
Let, however, the Munis always adore the piece of earth. Then there came
to that place Agastya and Kanwa and Bhrigu and Atri and Vrishakapi, and
Asita and Devala. The high-souled deities then, O thou of unfading glory,
performed their sacrifice. Those foremost of gods concluded it in due
time. Having completed that sacrifice of theirs on the breast of that
foremost of mountains. Himavat, the deities attached to the gift of earth
a sixth part of the merit arising from their sacrifice. The man who makes
a gift of even a span of earth (unto a Brahmana) with reverence and
faith, has never to languish under any difficulty and has never to meet
with any calamity. By making a gift of a house that keeps out cold, wind,
and sun, and that stand upon a piece of clean land, the giver attains to
the region of the deities and does not fall down even when his merit
becomes exhausted. By making a gift of a residential house, the giver,
possessed of wisdom, lives, O king, in happiness in the company of Sakra.
Such a person receives great honours in heaven. That person in whose
house a Brahmana of restrained sense, well-versed in the Vedas, and
belonging by birth to a family of preceptors, resides in contentment,
succeeds in attaining to and enjoying a region of high felicity.[341]
After the same manner, O best of the Bharatas, by giving away a shed for
the shelter of kine that can keep out cold and rain and that is
substantial in structure, the giver rescues seven generations of his race
(from hell). By giving away a piece of arable earth the giver attains to
excellent prosperity. By giving a piece of earth containing mineral
wealth, the giver aggrandises his family and race. One should never give
away any earth that is barren or that is burnt (arid); nor should one
give away any earth that is in close vicinity to a crematorium, or that
has been owned and enjoyed by a sinful person before such gift. When a
man performs a Sraddha in honour of the Pitris on earth belonging to
another person, the Pitris render both the gift of that earth and the
Sraddha itself futile.[342] Hence, one possessed of wisdom should buy
even a small piece of earth and make a gift of it. The Pinda that is
offered to one's ancestors on earth that has been duly purchased becomes
inexhaustible.[343] Forests, and mountains, and rivers, and Tirthas are
regarded as having no owners. No earth need be purchased here for
performing Sraddhas. Even this has been said, O king, on the subject of
the merits of making gifts of earth. After this, O sinless one, I shall
discourse to thee on the subject of the gift of kine. Kine are regarded
as superior to all the ascetics. And since it is so, the divine Mahadeva
for that reason performed penance in their company. Kine, O Bharata,
dwell in the region of Brahman, in the company of Soma. Constituting as
it does the highest end, regenerate Rishis crowned with success strive to
attain to that very region. Kine benefit human beings with milk, ghee,
curds, dung, skin, bones, horns, and hair, O Bharata. Kine do not feel
cold or heat. They always work. The season of rains also cannot afflict
them at all. And since kine attain to the highest end (viz., residence in
the region of Brahman), in the company of Brahmanas, therefore do the
wise say that king and Brahmanas are equal. In days of yore, king
Rantideva performed a grand sacrifice in which an immense number of kine
were offered up and slaughtered. From the juice that was secreted by the
skins of the slaughtered animals, a river was formed that came to be
called by the name of Charmanwati. Kine no longer form animals fit for
sacrifice. They now constitute animals that are fit for gift. That king
who makes gifts of kine unto the foremost of Brahmanas, O monarch, is
sure to get over every calamity even if he falls into it. The man who
makes a gift of a thousand kine has not to go to hell. Such a person, O
ruler of men, obtains victory everywhere. The very chief of the deities
had said that the milk of kine is nectar. For this reason, one who makes
a gift of a cow is regarded as making a gift of nectar. Persons
conversant with the Vedas have declared that the Ghee manufactured from
cows' milk is the very best of all libations poured into the sacrificial
fire. For this reason, the man who makes a gift of a cow is regarded as
making a gift of a libation for sacrifice. A bovine bull is the
embodiment of heaven. He who makes the gift of a bovine bull unto an
accomplished Brahmana, receives great honours in heaven. Kine, O chief of
Bharata's race, are said to be the life-breath of living creatures.
Hence, the man who makes the gift of a cow is said to make the gift of
life-breath. Persons conversant with the Vedas have said that kine
constitute the great refuge of living creatures. Hence, the man who makes
the gift of a cow is regarded as making the gift of what is the high
refuge for all creatures. The cow should never be given away for
slaughter (i.e., unto one who will kill her); nor should the cow be given
unto a tiller of the soil; nor should the cow be given unto an atheist.
The cow should not also, O chief of the Bharatas, be given unto one whose
occupation is the keeping of kine.[344] The wise have said that a person
who gives away the cow unto any of such sinful persons has to sink into
everlasting hell. One should never give unto a Brahmana a cow that is
lean, or that produces calves that do not live, or that is barren, or
that is diseased, or that is defective of limb, or that is worn out with
toil. The man that gives away ten thousand kine attains to heaven and
sports in bliss in the companionship of Indra. The man who makes gifts of
kine by hundred thousand acquires many regions of inexhaustible felicity.
Thus have I recited to thee the merits attaching to the gift of kine and
of sesame, as also to the gift of earth. Listen now to me as I discourse
to thee upon the gift of food, O Bharata. The gift of food, O son of
Kunti, is regarded as a very superior gift. King Rantideva in days of
yore ascended to heaven by having made gifts of food. That king, who make
a gift of food unto one that is toil-worn and hungry, attains to that
region of supreme felicity which is the Self-born's own. Men fail to
attain by gifts of gold and robes and of other thing, to that felicity to
which givers of food succeed in attaining, O thou of great puissance!
Food is, indeed, the first article. Food is regarded as the highest
prosperity. It is from food that life springs, as also energy and prowess
and strength. He who always makes gifts of food, with attention, unto the
righteous, never falls into any distress.. Even this has been said by
Parasara. Having worshipped the deities duly, food should be first
dedicated to them. It has been said, O king, that the kind of food that
is taken by particular men is taken also by the deities those men
worship.[345] That man who makes a gift of food in the bright fortnight
of the month of Kartika, succeeds in crossing every difficulty here add
attains to inexhaustible felicity hereafter. That man who makes a gift of
food unto a hungry guest arrived at his abode, attains to all those
regions, O chief of Bharata's race, that are reserved for persons
acquainted with Brahma. The man who makes gifts of food is sure to cross
every difficulty and distress. Such a person comes over every sin and
cleanses himself of every evil act. I have thus discoursed to thee upon
the merits of making gifts of food, of sesame, of earth, and of kine.'"



SECTION LXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard, O sire, of the merits of the different
kinds of gift upon which thou hast discoursed to me. I understand, O
Bharata, that the gift of food is especially laudable and superior. What
however, are the great merits of making gifts of drink. I desire to hear
of this in detail, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall, O chief of Bharata's race, discourse to thee
upon this subject. Listen to me, O thou of unbaffled prowess, as I speak
to thee. I shall, O sinless one, discourse unto thee of gifts beginning
with that of drink. The merit that a man acquires by making gifts of food
and drink is such that the like of it, I think, is incapable of being
acquired through any other gift. There is no gift, therefore, that is
superior to that of either food or drink. It is no food that all living
creatures are able to exist. For this reason, food is regarded as a very
superior object in all the worlds. From food the strength and energy of
living creatures constantly increases. Hence, the lord of all creatures
has himself said that the gift of food is a very superior gift. Thou hast
heard, O son of Kunti, what the auspicious words are of Savitri herself
(on the subject of the gift of food). Thou knowest for what reason those
words were said, what those words were, and how they were said in course
of the sacred Mantras, O thou of great intelligence. A man, by making a
gift of food, really makes a gift of life itself. There is no gift in
this world that is superior to the gift of life. Thou art not
unacquainted with this saying of Lomasa, O thou of mighty arms! The end
that was attained in former days by king Sivi in consequence of his
having granted life to the pigeon is acquired by him, O monarch, who
makes a gift of food unto a Brahmana. Hence, it has been heard by us that
they that give life attain to very superior regions of felicity in after
life. Food, O best of the Kurus, may or may not be superior to drink.
Nothing can exist without the aid of what springs from water. The very
lord of all the planets, viz., the illustrious Soma, has sprung from
water. Amrita and Sudha and Swadha and milk as also every kind of food,
the deciduous herbs, O monarch, and creepers (medicinal and of other
virtues), spring from water. From these, O king, the life-breath of all
living creatures flows. The deities have nectar for their food. The Nagas
have Sudha. The Pitris have Swadha for theirs. The animals have herbs and
plants for their food. The wise have said that rice, etc., constitute the
food of human beings. All these, O chief of men, spring from water.
Hence, there is nothing superior to the gift of water or drink. If a
person wishes to secure prosperity for himself, he should always make
gifts of drink. The gift of water is regarded as very praiseworthy. It
leads to great fame and bestows long life on the giver. The giver of
water, O son of Kunti, always stays over the heads of his enemies. Such a
person obtains the fruition of all his wishes and earns everlasting fame.
The giver, O chief of men, becomes cleansed of every sin and obtains
unending felicity hereafter as he proceeds to heaven, O thou of great
splendour. Mann himself has said that such a person earns regions of
inexhaustible bliss in the other world.'"



SECTION LXVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou discourse to me once again, O grandsire,
upon the merits attaching to gifts of sesame and of lamps for lighting
darkness, as also of food and robes.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O Yudhishthira, is recited the
narrative of the discourse that took place in ancient times between a
Brahmana and Yama. In the country lying between the rivers Ganga and
Yamuna, at the foot of the hills called Yamuna, there was a large town
inhabited by Brahmanas. The town was celebrated under the name of
Parnasala and was very delightful in appearance, O king. A large number
of learned Brahmanas lived in it. One day, Yama, the ruler of the dead,
commanded a messenger of his, who was clad in black, endued with
blood-red eyes and hair standing erect, and possessed of feet, eyes, and
nose all of which resembled those of a crow, saying, 'Go thou to the town
inhabited by Brahmanas and bring hither the person known by the name of
Sarmin and belonging by birth to the race of Agastya. He is intent on
mental tranquillity and possessed of learning. He is a preceptor engaged
in teaching the Vedas and his practices are well-known. Do not bring me
another person belonging to the same race and living in the same
neighbourhood. This other man is equal unto him I want, in virtues,
study, and birth. With respect to children and conduct, this other
resembles the intelligent Sarmin. Do thou bring the individual I have in
view. He should be worshipped with respect (instead of being dragged
hither with irreverence).' The messenger having come to the place, did
the very reverse of what he had been bidden to do. Attacking that person,
he brought him who had been forbidden by Yama to be brought. Possessed of
great energy, Yama rose up at the sight of the Brahmana and worshipped
him duly. The king of the dead then commanded his messenger, saying, 'Let
this one be taken back, and let the other one be brought to me.' When the
great judge of the dead said these words, that Brahmana addressed him and
said, 'I have completed my study of the Vedas and am no longer attached
to the world. Whatever period may yet remain of my mortal existence, I
wish to pass, dwelling even here, O thou of unfading glory![346]

"Yama said, 'I cannot ascertain the exact period, ordained by Time, of
one's life, and hence, unurged by Time, I cannot allow one to take up
one's residence here. I take note of the acts of righteousness (or
otherwise) that one does in the world. Do thou, O learned Brahmana of
great splendour return immediately to thy abode. 'I ell me what also is
in thy mind and what I can do for thee, O thou of unfading glory!'

"The Brahmana said, 'Do thou tell me what those acts are by accomplishing
which one may earn great merit. O best of all beings, thou art the
foremost of authorities (on the subject) even in the three worlds.'

"Yama said, 'Do thou hear, O regenerate Rishi, the excellent ordinances
regarding gifts. The gift of sesame seeds is a very superior one. It
produces everlasting merit. O foremost of regenerate ones, one should
make gifts of as much sesame as one can. By making gifts of sesame every
day, one is sure to attain the fruition of one's every wish. The gift of
sesame at Sraddhas is applauded. Verily the gift of sesame is a very
superior one. Do thou make gifts of sesame unto the Brahmanas according
to the rites ordained in the scriptures. One should on the day of the
full moon of the month of Vaisakha, make gilts of sesame unto the
Brahmanas. They should also be made to eat and to touch sesame on every
occasion that one can afford. They that are desirous of achieving what is
beneficial to them should, with their whole souls, do this in their
houses.[347] Without doubt, men should similarly make gifts of water and
establish resting places for the distribution of drinking water.[348] One
should cause tanks and lakes and wells to be excavated. Such acts are
rare in the world, O best of regenerate persons! Do thou always make
gifts of water. This act is fraught with great merit. O best of
regenerate persons, thou shouldst establish resting places along the
roads for the distribution of water. After one has eaten, the gift unto
one should especially be made of water for drink.'

"Bhishma continued, 'After Yama had said these words unto him, the
messenger who had borne him from his abode conveyed him back to it. The
Brahmana, on his return, obeyed the instructions he had received. Having
thus conveyed him back to his abode the messenger of Yama fetched Sarmin
who had really been sought by Yama. Taking Sarmin unto him, he informed
his master. Possessed of great energy, the judge of the dead worshipped
that righteous Brahmana, and having conversed with him a while dismissed
him for being taken back to his abode. Unto him also Yama gave the same
instructions. Sarmin, too, coming back into the world of men, did all
that Yama had said. Like the gift of water, Yama, from a desire of doing
good to the Pitris, applauds the gift of lamps to light dark places.
Hence, the giver of a lamp for lighting a dark place is regarded as
benefiting the Pitris. Hence, O best of the Bharatas, one should always
give lamps for lighting dark spots. The giving of lamps enhances the
visual power of the deities, the Pitris, and one's own self.[349] It has
been said, O king, that the gift of gems is a very superior gift. The
Brahmana, who, having accepted a gift of gems, sells the same for
performing a sacrifice, incurs no fault. The Brahmana, who, having
accepted a gift of gems makes a gift of them unto Brahmanas. acquires
inexhaustible merit himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon him from
whom he had originally received them. Conversant with every duty Manu
himself has said that he, who, observant of proper restraints, earns
makes a gift of gems unto a Brahmana observant of proper restraints earns
inexhaustible merit himself and confers inexhaustible merit upon the
recipient. The man who is content with his own wedded wife and who makes
a gift of robes, earns an excellent complexion and excellent vestments
for himself. I have told thee, O foremost of men, what the merits are
that attach to gifts of kine, of gold, and the sesame agreeably to
deserve precepts of the Vedas and the scriptures One should marry and
raise offspring upon one's wedded wives. Of all acquisitions, O son of
Kuru's race, that of male issue is regarded as the foremost.'"



 SECTION LXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou, O foremost one of Kuru's race, discourse
unto me once again of the excellent ordinance regarding gifts, with
especial reference, O thou of great wisdom, to the gift of earth. A
Kshatriya should make gifts of earth unto a Brahmana of righteous deeds.
Such a Brahmana should accept the gift with due rites. None else,
however, than a Kshatriya is competent to make gifts of earth. It behoves
thee now to tell me what these objects are that persons of all classes
are free to bestow if moved by the desire of earning merit. Thou shouldst
also tell me what has been said in the Vedas on this subject.'

"Bhishma said, 'There are three gifts that go by the same name and that
are productive of equal merits. Indeed, these three confer the fruition
of every wish. The three objects whose gifts are of such a character are
kine, earth, and knowledge.[350] That person who tells his disciple words
of righteous import drawn from the Vedas acquires merit equal to that
which is won by making gifts of earth and kine. Similarly are kine
praised (as objects of gifts). There is no object of gift higher than
they. Kine are supposed to confer merit immediately. They are also, O
Yudhishthira, such that a gift of them cannot but lead to great merit.
Kine are the mothers of all creatures. They bestow every kind of
happiness. The person that desires his own prosperity should always make
gifts of kine. No one should kick at kine or proceed through the midst of
kine. Kine are goddesses and homes of auspiciousness. For this reason,
they always deserve worship. Formerly, the deities, while tilling the
earth whereon they performed a sacrifice, used the goad for striking the
bullocks yoked to the plough. Hence, in tilling earth for such a purpose,
one may, without incurring censure or sin, apply the goad to bullocks. In
other acts, however, bullocks should never be struck with the goad or the
whip When kine are grazing or lying down no one should annoy them in any
way. When the cows are thirsty and they do not get water (in consequence
of any one obstructing their access to the pool or tank or river), they,
by merely looking at such a person, can destroy him with all his
relatives and friends. What creatures can be more sacred than kine when
with the very dung of kine altars whereon Sraddhas are performed in
honour of the Pitris, or those whereon the deities are worshipped, are
cleansed and sanctified? That man, who, before eating himself gives every
day, for a year, only a handful of grass unto a cow belonging to another,
is regarded as undergoing a vow or observance which bestows the fruition
of every wish. Such a person ac-quires children and fame and wealth and
prosperity, and dispels all evils and dreams.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What should be the indications of those kine that
deserve to be given away? What are those kine that should be passed over
in the matter of gifts? What should be the character of those persons
unto whom kine should be given? Who, again, are those unto whom kine
should not be given?

"Bhishma said, 'A cow should never be given unto one that is not
righteous in behaviour, or one that is sinful, or one that is covetous or
one that is untruthful in speech, or one that does not make offerings
unto the Pitris and deities. A person, by making a gift of ten kine unto
a Brahmana learned in the Vedas, poor in earthly wealth, possessed of
many children, and owning a domestic are, attains to numerous regions of
great felicity. When a man performs any act that is fraught with merit
assisted by what he has got in gift from another, a portion of the merit
attaching to that act becomes always his with whose wealth the act has
been accomplished. He that procreates a person, he that rescues a person,
and he that assigns the means of sustenance to a person are regarded as
the three sires. Services dutifully rendered to the preceptor destroys
sin. Pride destroys even great fame. The possession of three children
destroys the reproach of childlessness, and the possession of ten kine
dispels the reproach of poverty. Unto one that is devoted to the Vedanta,
that is endued with great learning, that has been filled with wisdom,
that has a complete control over his senses, that is observant of the
restraints laid down in the scriptures, that has withdrawn himself from
all worldly attachments, unto him that says agreeable words unto all
creatures, unto him that would never do an evil act even when impelled by
hunger, unto one that is mild or possessed of a peaceful disposition,
unto one that is hospitable to all guests,--verily unto such a Brahmana
should a man, possessed of similar conduct and owning children and wives,
assign the means of sustenance. The measure of merit that attaches to the
gift of kine unto a deserving person is exactly the measure of the sin
that attaches to the act of robbing a Brahmana of what belongs to him.
Under all circumstances should the spoliation of what belongs to a
Brahmana be avoided, and his spouses kept at a distance.'"



SECTION LXX

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O perpetuator of Kuru's race, is
recited by the righteous the narrative of the great calamity that
overtook king Nriga in consequence of his spoliation of what had belonged
to a Brahmans. Some time before, certain young men of Yadu's race, while
searching for water, had come upon a large well covered with grass and
creepers. Desirous of drawing water from it, they laboured very much for
removing the creepers that covered its mouth. After the mouth had been
cleaned, they beheld within the well a very large lizard residing within
it. The young men made strong and repeated efforts for rescuing the
lizard from that situation. Resembling a very hill in size, the lizard
was sought to be freed by means of cords and leathern tongs. Not
succeeding in their intention the young men then went to Janardana.
Addressing him they said, 'Covering the entire space of a well, there is
a very large lizard to be seen. Notwithstanding our best efforts we have
not succeeded in rescuing it from that situation.' Even this was what
they represented unto Krishna. Vasudeva then proceeded to the spot and
took out the lizard and questioned it as to who it was. The lizard said
that it was identical with the soul of king Nriga who had flourished in
days of old and who had performed many sacrifices. Unto the lizard that
said those words, Madhava spoke, 'Thou didst perform many righteous acts.
No sin didst thou commit. Why, then, O king, hast thou come to such a
distressful end? Do thou explain what this is and why it has been brought
about. We have heard that thou didst repeatedly make gifts unto the
Brahmanas of hundreds upon hundreds of thousands and once again eight
times hundreds upon hundreds of ten thousands of kine.[351] Why,
therefore, has this end overtaken thee?' Nriga then replied unto Krishna,
saying, 'On one occasion a cow belonging to a Brahmana who regularly
worshipped his domestic fire, escaping from the owner's abode while he
was absent from home entered my flock. The keepers of my cattle included
that cow in their tale of a thousand. In time that cow was given away by
me unto a Brahmana, acting as I did from desire of happiness in heaven.
The true owner, returning home, sought for his lost cow and at last saw
it in the house of another.' Finding her, the owner said, 'This cow is
mine!' The other person contested his claim, till both, disputing and
excited with wrath, came to me. Addressing me one of them said, 'Thou
hast been the giver of this cow!' The other one said, 'Thou hast robbed
me of this cow--she is mine! I then solicited the Brahmana unto whom I
had given that cow, to return the gift in exchange for hundreds upon
hundreds of other kine. Without acceding to my earnest solicitations, he
addressed me, saying. 'The cow I have got is well-suited to time and
place. She yields a copious measure of milk, besides being very quiet and
very fond of us. The mills she yields is very sweet. She is regarded as
worthy of every praise in my house. She is nourishing, besides, a weak
child of mine that has just been weaned. She is incapable of being given
up by me.' Having said these words, the Brahmana went away. I then
solicited the other Brahmana offering him an exchange, and saying, 'Do
thou take a hundred thousand kine for this one cow.' The Brahmana,
however, replied unto me, saying, 'I do not accept gifts from persons of
the kingly order. I am able to get on without help. De thou then, without
loss of time, give me that very cow which was mine.' Even thus, O slayer
of Madhu, did that Brahmana speak unto me. I offered to make gifts unto
him of gold and silver and horses and cars. That foremost of Brahmanas
refused to accept any of these as gift and went away. Meanwhile, urged by
time's irresistible influence, I had to depart from this world. Wending
to the region of the Pitris I was taken to the presence of the king of
the dead. Worshipping me duly Yama addressed me, saying, 'The end cannot
be ascertained, O king, of thy deed. There is, however, a little sin
which was unconsciously perpetrated by thee. Do thou suffer the
punishment for that sin now or afterwards as it pleases thee. Thou hadst
(upon thy accession to the throne) sworn that thou wouldst protect (all
persons in the enjoyment of their own). That oath of thine was not
rigidly kept by thee. Thou tookest also what belonged to a Brahmana. Even
this has been the two-fold sin thou hast committed.' I answered, saying,
'I shall first undergo the distress of punishment, and when that is over,
I shall enjoy the happiness that is in store for me, O lord!' After I had
said those words unto the king of the dead, I fell down on the Earth.
Though fallen down I still could hear the words that Yama said unto me
very loudly. Those words were, Janardana the son of Vasudeva, will rescue
thee! Upon the completion of a full thousand years, when the demerit will
be exhausted of thy sinful act, thou shalt then attain to many regions of
inexhaustible felicity that have been acquired by thee through thy own
acts of righteousness. Falling down I found myself, with head downwards,
within this well, transformed into a creature of the intermediate order.
Memory, however, did not leave me. By thee I have been rescued today.
What else can it testify to than the puissance of thy penances? Let me
have thy permission. O Krishna! I desire to ascend to heaven! permitted
then by Krishna, king Nriga bowed his head unto him and then mounted a
celestial car and proceeded to heaven. After Nriga had thus proceeded to
heaven, O best of the Bharatas, Vasudeva recited this verse, O delighter
of the Kurus. No one should consciously appropriate anything belonging to
a Brahmana. The property of a Brahmana, if taken, destroys the taker even
as the Brahmana's cow destroyed king Nriga! I tell thee, again, O Partha,
that a meeting with the good never proves fruitless. Behold, king Nriga
was rescued from hell through meeting with one that is good. As a gift is
productive of merit even so an act of spoliation leads to demerit. Hence
also, O Yudhishthira, one should avoid doing any injury to kine.'"[352]



SECTION LXXI

''Yudhishthira said, V sinless one, do thou discourse to me more in
detail upon the merits that are attainable by making gifts of kine. O
thou of mighty arms, I am never satiated with thy words!'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited the old history of the
discourse between the Rishi Uddalaki and his son called Nachiketa. Once
on a time the Rishi Uddalaki endued with great intelligence, approaching
his son Nachiketa, said unto him, 'Do thou wait upon and serve me.' Upon
the completion of the vow he had observed the great Rishi once more said
unto his son, 'Engaged in performing my ablutions and deeply taken up
with my Vedic study, I have forgotten to bring with me the firewood, the
Kusa blades, the flowers, the water jar, and the potherbs I had gathered.
Do thou bring me those things from the riverside.' The son proceeded to
the spot indicated, but saw that all the articles had been washed away by
the current. Coming back to his father, he said, 'I do not see the
things!' Afflicted as he then was with hunger, thirst, and fatigue, the
Rishi Uddalaki of high ascetic merit, in a sudden wrath, cursed his son,
saying, 'Do thou meet with Yama today!' Thus struck by his sire with the
thunder of his speech, the son, with joined palms, said, 'Be appeased
with me!' Soon, however, he fell down on the earth, deprived of life.
Beholding Nachiketa prostrated upon the earth, his sire became deprived
of his senses through grief. He, too, exclaiming, 'Alas, what have I
done,' fell down on the earth. Filled with grief, as he indulged in
lamentations for his son, the rest or that day passed away and night
came. Then Nachiketa, O son of Kuru's race, drenched by the tears of his
father, gave signs of returning life as he lay on a mat of Kusa grass.
His restoration to life under the tears of his sire resembled the
sprouting forth of seeds when drenched with auspicious showers. The son
just restored to consciousness was still weak. His body was smeared with
fragrant unguents and he looked like one just awaking from a deep
slumber. The Rishi asked him, saying, 'Hast thou, O son, acquired
auspicious regions by thy own acts? By good luck, thou hast been restored
to me! Thy body does not seem to be human!' Thus asked by high-souled
father, Nachiketa who had seen every thing with his own eyes, made the
following answer unto him in the midst of the Rishis, 'In obedience to
thy command I proceeded to the extensive region of Yama which is
possessed of a delightful effulgence. There I beheld a palatial mansion
which extended for thousands of Yojanas and emitted a golden splendour
from every part. As soon as Yama beheld me approaching with face towards
him, he commanded his attendants saying, 'Give him a good seat, verily,
the king of the dead, for thy sake worshipped we with the Arghya and the
other ingredients.' Thus worshipped by Yama and seated in the midst of
his counsellors, I then said mildly, 'I have come to thy abode, O judge
of the dead! Do thou assign me those regions which I deserve for my
acts!' Yama then answered me, saying, 'Thou art not dead, O amiable one!'
Endued with penances, thy father said unto thee, 'Do thou meet with Yama!
The energy of thy sire is like that of a blazing fire. I could not
possibly falsify that speech of his. Thou hast seen me. Do thou go hence,
O child! The author of thy body is indulging in lamentations for thee.
Thou art my dear guest. What wish of thine cherished by thee in thy heart
shall I grant thee? Solicit the fruition of whatever desire thou mayst
cherish.' Thus addressed by him, I replied unto the king of the dead,
saying, 'I have arrived within thy dominions from which no traveller ever
returns. If I really be an object deserving of thy attentions, I desire,
O king of the dead, to have a sight of those regions of high prosperity
and happiness that have been reserved for doers of righteous deeds.' Thus
addressed by me, Yama caused me to be mounted upon a vehicle of splendour
as effulgent as that of the sun and unto which were harnessed many
excellent steeds. Bearing me on that vehicle, he showed me, O foremost of
regenerate persons, all those delightful regions that are reserved for
the righteous. I beheld in those regions many mansions of great
resplendence intended for high-souled persons. Those mansions are of
diverse forms and are adorned with every kind of gem. Bright as the disc
of the moon, they are ornamented with rows of tinkling bells. Hundreds
among them are of many storeys. Within them are pleasant groves and woods
and transparent bodies of water. Possessed of the effulgence of lapis
lazuli and the sun, and made of silver and gold, their complexion
resembles the colour of the morning sun. Some of them are immovable and
some movable. Within them are many hills of viands and enjoyable articles
and robes and beds in abundance. Within them are many trees capable of
granting the fruition of every wish. There are also many rivers and roads
and spacious halls and lakes and large tanks. Thousands of cars with
rattling wheels may be seen there, having excellent steeds harnessed unto
them. Many rivers that run milk, many hills of ghee, and large bodies of
transparent water occur there. Verily, I beheld many such regions, never
seen by me before of happiness and joy, approved by the king of the dead.
Beholding all those objects, I addressed the ancient and puissant judge
of the dead, saying, 'For whose use and enjoyment have these rivers with
eternal currents of milk and ghee been ordained?' Yama answered me
saying, 'These streams of milk and ghee, know thou, are for the enjoyment
of those righteous persons, that make gifts in the world of men. Other
eternal worlds there are which are filled with such mansions free from
sorrow of every kind. These are reserved for those persons that are
engaged in making gifts of kine.[353] The mere gift of kine is not worthy
of praise. There are considerations of propriety or otherwise about the
person unto whom kine should be given, the time for making those gifts,
the kind of kine that should form the object of gifts, and the rites that
should be observed in making the gifts. Gifts of kine should be made
after ascertaining the distinctive qualifications of both Brahmanas (who
are to receive them) and the kine themselves (which are to be given
away). Kine should not be given unto one in whose abode they are likely
to suffer from fire or the sun. That Brahmana who is possessed of Vedic
lore, who is of austere penances, and who performs sacrifices, is
regarded as worthy of receiving kine in gift. Those kine that have been
rescued from distress situation, or that have been given by poor
householders from want of sufficient means to feed and cherish them, are,
for these reasons, reckoned as of high value.[354] Abstaining from all
food and living upon water alone for three nights and sleeping the while
on the bare earth, one should, having properly fed the kine one intends
to give away, give them unto Brahmanas after having gratified them also
(with other gifts). The kine given away should be accompanied by their
calves. They should, again, be such as to bring forth good calves, at the
proper seasons. They should be accompanied with other articles so given
away. Having completed the gift, the giver should live for three days on
only milk and forbearing from food of every other kind. He, who gives a
cow that is not vicious, that brings forth good calves at proper
intervals, and that does not fly away from the owners' house, and
accompanies such gift with a vessel of white brass for milking her,
enjoys the felicity of heaven for as many years as are measured by the
number of hairs on the animal's body. He, who gives unto a Brahmana a
bull well-broken and capable of bearing burdens, possessed of strength
and young in years, disinclined to do any mischief, large-sized and
endued with energy, enjoys those regions, that are reserved for givers of
kine. He is regarded as a proper person for receiving a cow in gift who
is known to be mild towards kine, who takes kine for his refuge, who is
grateful, and who has no means of subsistence assigned unto him. When an
old man becomes ill, or when a Brahmana intends to perform a sacrifice,
or when one wishes to till for agriculture, or when one gets a son
through the efficacy of a Homa performed for the purpose, or for the use
of one's preceptor, or for the sustenance of a child (born in the usual
way), one should give away a beloved cow. Even these are the
considerations that are applauded (in the matter of making gifts of kine)
in respect of place and time. The kine that deserve to be given away are
those that yield copious measures of milk, or those that are well-known
(for their docility and other virtues). or those that have been purchased
for a price, or those that have been acquired as honoraria for learning,
or those that have been obtained in exchange by offering other living
creatures (such as sheep and goats, etc.), or those that have been won by
prowess of arms, or those that have been gained as marriage-dower (from
fathers-in-law and other relations of the wife).'

"Nachiketa continued, 'Hearing these words of Vaivaswata, I once more
addressed him, saying, 'What are those objects by giving which, when kine
are not procurable, givers may yet go to regions reserved for men making
gifts of kine?' Questioned by me, the wise Yama answered, explaining
further what the end is that is attainable by making gifts of kine. He
said, 'In the absence of kine, a person by making gifts of what has been
regarded as the substitute of kine, wins the merit of making gifts of
kine. If, in the absence of kine, one makes a gift of a cow made of ghee,
observant of a vow the while, one gets for one's use these rivers of ghee
all of which approach one like an affectionate mother approaching her
beloved child. If, in the absence of even a cow made of ghee, one makes a
gift of a cow made of sesame seeds, observing a cow the while, one
succeeds with the assistance of that cow to get over all calamities in
this world and to enjoy great happiness hereafter from these rivers of
milk that thou beholdest! If in the absence of a cow made of sesame
seeds, one makes a gift of a cow made of water one succeeds in coming to
these happy regions and enjoying this river of cool and transparent
water, that is, besides capable of granting the fruition of every wish.'
The king of the dead explained to me all this while I was his guest, and,
O thou of unfading glory, great was the joy that I felt at sight of all
the wonders he showed me. I shall now tell thee what would certainly be
agreeable to thee. I have now got a great sacrifice whose performance
does not require much wealth. That sacrifice (constituted by gifts of
kine) may be said to flow from me, O sire! Others will obtain it also. It
is not inconsistent with the ordinances of the Vedas. The curse that thou
hadst pronounced upon me was no curse but was in reality a blessing,
since it enabled me to have a sight of the great king of the dead. There
I have beheld what the rewards are that attach to gifts. I shall,
henceforth, O thou of great soul, practise the duty of gift without any
doubt lurking in my mind respecting its rewards. And, O great Rishi, the
righteous Yama, filled with joy, repeatedly told me, 'One, who, by making
frequent gifts, has succeeded in acquiring purity of mind should then
make gifts of kine specially. This topic (about gifts) is fraught with
sanctity. Do thou never disregard the duties in respect of gifts. Gifts,
again, should be made unto deserving persons, when time and place are
suitable. Do thou, therefore, always make gifts of kine. Never entertain
any doubts in this respect. Devoted to the path of gifts, many
high-souled persons in days of yore used to make gifts of kine. Fearing
to practise austere penances, they made gifts according to the extent of
their power. In time they cast off all sentiments of pride and vanity,
and purified their souls. Engaged in performing Sraddhas in honour of the
Pitris and in all acts of righteousness, they used to make, according to
the extent of their power, gifts of kine, and as the reward of those acts
they have attained to heaven and are shining in effulgence for such
righteousness. One should, on the eighth day of the moon that is known by
the name of Kamyashtami, make gifts of kine, properly won, unto the
Brahmanas after ascertaining the eligibility of the recipients (by the
ordinances already laid down). After making the gift, one should then
subsist for ten days together upon only the milk of kine, their dung and
their urine (abstaining from all other food the while). The merit that
one acquires by making a gift of a bull is equal to that which attaches
to the divine vow. By making a gift of a couple of kine one acquires, as
the reward thereof, a mastery of the Vedas. By making a gift of cars and
vehicles with kine yoked thereto, one acquires the merit of baths in
sacred waters. By making a gift of a cow of the Kapila species, one
becomes cleansed of all one's sins. Verily, by giving away even a single
cow of the Kapila species that has been acquired by legitimate means, one
becomes cleansed of all the sins one may have committed. There is nothing
higher (in point of tastes) than the milk which is yielded by kine. The
gift of a cow is truly regarded as a very superior gift. Kine by yielding
milk, rescue all the worlds from calamity. It is kine, again, that
produce the food upon which creatures subsist. One, who, knowing the
extent of the service that kine do, does not entertain in one's heart
affection for kine, is a sinner that is certain to sink in hell.[355] If
one gives a thousand or a hundred or ten or five kine, verily, if one
gives unto a righteous Brahmana even a single cow which brings forth good
calves at proper intervals, one is sure to see that cow approach one in
heaven in the form of a river of sacred water capable of granting the
fruition of every wish. In respect of the prosperity and the growth that
kine confer, in the matter also of the protection that kine grant unto
all creatures of the earth, kine are equal to the very rays of the sun
that fall on the earth.[356] The word that signifies the cow stands also
for the rays of the sun. The giver of a cow becomes the progenitor of a
very large race that extends over a large part of the earth. Hence, he
that gives a cow shines like a second sun in resplendence. The disciple
should, in the matter of making gifts of kine, select his preceptor. Such
a disciple is sure to go to heaven. The selection of a preceptor (in the
matter of the performance of pious deeds) is regarded as a high duty by
persons conversant with the ordinances. This is, indeed, the initial
ordinance. All other ordinances (respecting the gift of kine) depend upon
it.[357] Selecting, after examination, an eligible person among the
Brahmanas, one should make unto him the gift of a cow that has been
acquired by legitimate means, and having made the gift cause him to
accept it. The deities and men and ourselves also, in wishing good to
other, say, 'Let the merits attaching to gifts be thine in consequence of
thy righteousness!' Even thus did the judge of the dead speak unto me, O
regenerate Rishi. I then bowed my head unto the righteous Yama. Obtaining
his permission I left his dominions and have now come to the sole of thy
feet.'"



SECTION LXXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast, O grandsire, discoursed to me the topic
of gifts of kine in speaking of the Rishi Nachiketa Thou hast also
impliedly discoursed, O puissant one, on the efficacy and pre-eminence of
that act. Thou hast also told me, O grandsire of great intelligence, of
the exceedingly afflicting character of the calamity that overtook the
high-souled king Nriga in consequence of a single fault of his. He had to
dwell for a tong time at Dwaravati (in the form of a mighty lizard) and
how Krishna became the cause of his rescue from that miserable plight. I
have, however, one doubt. It is on the subject of the regions of kine. I
desire to hear, in detail, about those regions which are reserved for the
residence of persons that make gifts of kine.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited the old narrative of the
discourse between Him who sprang from the primeval lotus and him who
performed a hundred sacrifices.'

"Sakra said, 'I see, O Grandsire, that those who are residents of the
region of kine transcend by their resplendence the prosperity of the
denizens of heaven and pass them by (as beings of an inferior station).
This has raised a doubt in my mind. Of what kind, O holy one, are the
regions of kine? Tell me all about them, O sinless one! Verily, what is
the nature of those regions that are inhabited by givers of kine? I wish
to know this of what kind are those regions? What fruits do they bring?
What is the highest object there which the denizens thereof succeeds in
winning? What are its virtues? How also do men, freed from every kind of
anxiety, succeed in going to those regions? For what period does the
giver of a cow enjoy the fruits that are borne by his gift? How may
persons make gifts of many kine and how may they make gifts of a few
kine? What are the merits attaching to gifts of many kine and what those
that attach to gifts of a few only? How also do persons become givers of
kine without giving any kine in reality? Do thou tell me all this. How
does one making gifts of even many kine, O puissant lord, become the
equal of one that has made gift of only a few kine? How also does one who
make gifts of only a few kine succeed in becoming the equal of one who
has made gifts of many kine? What kind or Dakshina is regarded as
distinguished for pre-eminence in the matter of gifts of kine? It
behoveth thee, O holy one, to discourse unto me on all this agreeably to
truth.'"



SECTION LXXIII

"The Grandsire said, 'The questions thou hast asked me in respect of
kine, beginning with their gift, are such that there is none else in the
three worlds, O thou of a hundred sacrifices, who could put them! There
are many kinds of regions, O Sakra, which are invisible to even thee.
Those regions are seen by me, O Indra, as also by those women that are
chaste and that have been attached to only one husband. Rishis observant
of excellent vows, by means of their deeds of righteousness and piety,
and Brahmanas of righteous souls, succeed in repairing to them in even
their fleshy forms. Men that are observant of excellent vows behold those
regions which resemble the bright creations of dreams, aided by their
cleansed minds and by that (temporary) emancipation which succeeds the
loss of one's consciousness of body.[358] Listen, O thou of a thousand
eyes, to me as I tell thee what the attributes are with which those
regions are endued. There the very course of Time is suspended.
Decrepitude is not there, nor Fire which is omnipresent in the universe.
There the slightest evil does not occur, nor disease, nor weakness of any
kind. The kine that live there, O Vasava, obtain the fruition of every
desire which they cherish in their hearts. I have direct experience of
what I say unto thee. Capable of going everywhere at will and actually
repairing from place to place with ease, they enjoy the fruition of wish
after wish as it arises in their minds. Lakes and tanks and rivers and
forests of diverse kinds, and mansions and hills and all kinds of
delightful objects,--delightful, that is, to all creatures,--are to be
seen there. There is no region of felicity that is superior to any of
these of which I speak. All those foremost of men, O Sakra, who are
forgiving unto all creatures, who endure everything, who are full of
affection for all things, who render dutiful obedience unto their
preceptors, and who are free from pride and vanity, repair to those
regions of supreme felicity. He, who abstains from every kind of flesh,
who is possessed of a cleansed heart, who is endued with righteousness,
who worships his parents with reverence, who is endued with truthfulness
of speech and conduct, who attends with obedience upon the Brahmanas, who
is faultless in conduct, who never behaves with anger towards kine and
towards the Brahmanas, who is devoted to the accomplishment of every
duty, who serves his preceptors with reverence, who is devoted for his
whole life to truth and to gifts, and who is always forgiving towards all
transgression against himself, who is mild and self-restrained, who is
full of reverence for the deities, who is hospitable to all guests, who
is endued with compassion,--verily, he, who is adorned with these
attributes,--succeeds in attaining to the eternal and immutable region of
kine. He, who is stained with adultery, sees not such a region; nor he,
who is a slayer of his preceptor; nor he, who speaks falsely or indulges
in idle boasts; nor he, who always disputes with others; nor he who
behaves with hostility towards the Brahmanas. Indeed, that wicked wight,
who is stained with such faults fails to attain even a sight of these
regions of felicity; also he that injures his friends; also he that is
full of guile; also he that is ungrateful; also he that is a cheat; also
he that is crooked in conduct; also he that is a disregarder of religion;
also he that is a slayer of Brahmanas. Such men are incapable of
beholding in even imagination the region of kine that is the abode of
only those who are righteous of deeds. I have told thee everything about
the region of kine in minute detail, O chief of the deities! Hear now, O
thou of a hundred sacrifices, the merit that is theirs who are engaged in
making gifts of kine. He, who make gifts of kine, after purchasing them
with wealth obtained by inheritance or acquired lawfully by him, attains,
as the fruit of such an act to many regions of inexhaustible felicity.
He, who makes a gift of a cow, having acquired it with wealth won at
dice, enjoys felicity, O Sakra, for ten thousand years of celestial
measure, He, who acquires a cow as his share of ancestral wealth is said
to acquire her legitimately. Such a cow may be given away. They that make
gifts of kine so acquired obtain many eternal regions of felicity that is
inexhaustible. That person, who, having acquired a cow in gift makes a
gift of her with a pure heart, succeeds without doubt, O lord of Sachi,
in obtaining eternal regions of beatitude. That person, who, with
restrained senses speaks the truth from his birth (to the time of his
death) and who endures everything at the hands of his preceptor and of
the Brahmanas, and who practises forgiveness, succeeds in attaining to an
end that is equal to that of kine. That speech which is improper, O lord
of Sachi, should, never be addressed to a Brahmana. One, again, should
not, in even one's mind, do an injury to a cow. One should, in one's
conduct, imitate the cow, and show compassion towards the cow.[359] Hear,
O Sakra, what the fruits are that become his, who is devoted to the duty
of truth. If such a person gives away a single cow, that one cow becomes
equal to a thousand kine. If a Kshatriya, possessed of such
qualifications, makes a gift of a single cow, his merit becomes equal to
that of a Brahmana's. That single cow, listen, O Sakra which such a
Kshatriya gives away becomes the source of as much merit as the single
cow that a Brahmana gives away under similar circumstances. Even this is
the certain conclusion of the scriptures. If a Vaisya, possessed of
similar accomplishments, were to make a gift of a single cow, that cow
would be equal to five hundred kine (in respect of the merit she would
produce) If a Sudra endued with humility were to make a gift of a cow,
such a cow would be equal to a hundred and twenty-five kine (in respect
of the merit it would produce) Devoted to penances and truth, proficient
(in the scriptures and all acts) through dutiful services rendered to his
preceptor, endued with forgiveness of disposition, engaged in the worship
of the deities, possessed of a tranquil soul, pure (in body and mind),
enlightened, observant of all duties, and freed from every kind of
egotism, that man who makes a gift of a cow unto a Brahmana, certainly
attains to great merit through that act of his, viz., the gift, according
to proper rites, of a cow yielding copious milk. Hence, one, with
singleness of devotion, observant of truth and engaged in humbly serving
one's preceptor, should always make gifts of kine.[360] Hear, O Sakra,
what the merit is of that person, who, duly studying the Vedas, shows
reverence for kine, who always becomes glad at sight of kine, and who,
since his birth has always bowed his head unto kine. The merit that
becomes one's by performing the Rajasuya sacrifice, the merit that
becomes one's by making gifts of heaps of gold, that high merit is
acquired by a person who shows such reverence for kine. Righteous Rishis
and high-souled persons crowned with success have said so. Devoted to
truth, possessed of a tranquil soul, free from cupidity, always truthful
in speech, and behaving with reverence towards kine with the steadiness
of a vow, the man, who, for a whole year before himself taking any food,
regularly presents some food to kine, wins the merit, by such an act, of
the gift of a thousand kine. That man, who takes only one meal a day and
who gives away the entire quantity of his other meal unto kine.--verily,
that man, who thus reverences kine with the steadiness of a vow and shows
such compassion towards them,--enjoys for ten years' unlimited felicity.
That man, who confines himself to only one meal a day and 'with the other
meal saved for some time purchases a cow and makes a gift of it (unto a
Brahmana), earns, through that gift, O thou of a hundred sacrifices, the
eternal merit that attaches to the gift of as many kine as there are
hairs on the body of that single cow so given away. These are
declarations in respect of the merit that Brahmanas acquire by making
gifts of kine. Listen now to the merits that Kshatriyas may win. It has
been said that a Kshatriya, by purchasing a cow in this manner and making
a gift of it unto a Brahmana, acquires great felicity for five years. A
Vaisya, by such conduct, acquires only half the merit of a Kshatriya, and
a Sudra, by such conduct, earns half the merit that a Vaisya does. That
man, who sells himself and with the proceeds thereof purchases kine and
gives them away unto Brahmanas, enjoy felicity in heaven for as long a
period as kine are seen on earth. It has been said, O highly blessed one,
that in every hair of such kite as are purchased with the proceeds
obtained by selling oneself, there is a region of inexhaustible felicity.
That man, who having acquired kine by battle makes gifts of them (unto
Brahmanas), acquires as much merit as he, who makes gifts of kine after
having purchased the same with the proceeds of selling oneself. That man,
who, in the absence of kine, makes a gift of a cow made of sesame seeds,
restraining his senses the while, is rescued by such a cow from every
kind of calamity or distress. Such a man sports in great felicity. The
mere gift of kine is not fraught with merit. The considerations of
deserving recipients, of time, of the kind of kine, and of the ritual to
be observed, should be attended to. One should ascertain the proper time
for making a gift of kine. One should also ascertain the distinctive
qualifications of both Brahmanas (who are to receive them) and of kine
themselves (which are to be given away). Kine should not be given unto
one in whose abode they are likely to suffer from fire or the sun. One,
who is rich in Vedic lore, who is of pure lineage, who is endued with a
tranquil soul, who is devoted to the performance of sacrifices, who fears
the commission of sin, who is possessed of varied knowledge, who is
compassionate towards kine, who is mild in behaviour, who accords
protection unto all that seek it of him, and who has no means of
sustenance assigned unto him, is regarded as a proper person for
receiving a gift of kine. Unto a Brahmana who has no means of sustenance,
unto him while he is exceedingly afflicted for want of food (in a time,
of famine, for example) for purposes of agriculture, for a child born in
consequence of Homa, for the purposes of his preceptor, for the
sustenance of a child born (in the ordinary course), should a cow be
given. Verily, the gift should be made at a proper time and in a proper
place[361]. Those kine, O Sakra, whose dispositions are well-known, which
have been acquired as honoraria for knowledge, or which have been
purchased in exchange for other animals (such as goats, sheep, etc.), or
which have been who by prowess of arms, or obtained as marriage-dower; or
which have been acquired by being rescued from situations of danger, or
which incapable of being maintained by their 'poor owner have been made
over for careful keep, to another's house are, for such reasons, regarded
as proper objects of gift. Those kine which are strong of body, which
have good dispositions, and which emit an agreeable fragrance, are
applauded in the matter of gifts. As Ganga is the foremost of all
streams, even so is a Kapila cow the foremost of all animals of the
bovine breed. Abstaining from all food and living only upon water for
three nights, and sleeping for the same period upon the bare earth, one
should make gifts of kine unto Brahmanas after having gratified them with
other presents. Such kine, freed from every vice should, at the same
time, be accompanied by healthy calves that have not been weaned. Having
made the gift, the giver should live for the next three days in
succession on food consisting only of the products of the cow.[362] By
giving away a cow that is of good disposition, that quietly suffers
herself to be milked that always brings forth living and hale calves, and
that does not fly away from the owner's abode, the giver enjoys felicity
in the next world for as many years as there are hairs on her body.
Similarly, by giving unto a Brahmana a bull that is capable of bearing
heavy burden, that is young and strong and docile, that quietly bears the
yoke of the plough, and that is possessed of such energy as is sufficient
to undergo even great labour one attains to such regions as are his who
gives away ten kine. That person, who rescues kine and Brahmanas (from
danger) in the wilderness, O Kausika, becomes himself rescued from every
kind of calamity. Hear what his merit is.[363] The merit such a man
acquires is equal to the eternal merit of a Horse-sacrifice. Such a
person attains to whatever end he desires at the hour of death. Many a
region of felicity,--in fact, whatever happiness he covets in his
heart,--becomes attainable to him in consequence of such an act of his.
Verily, such man, permitted by kine, lives honoured in every region of
felicity. That man, who follows kine every day in the woods himself
subsisting the while on grass and cowdung and leaves of trees, his heart
freed from desire of fruit, his senses restrained from every improper
object and his mind purified of all dross,--that man,--O thou of a
hundred sacrifices, lives in joy and freed from the dominion of desire in
my region or in any other region of happiness that he wishes, in the
company of the deities!"



SECTION LXXIV

"Indra said, 'I wish to know, O Grandsire, what the end is that is
attained by him who consciously steals a cow or who sells one from
motives of cupidity."

"The Grandsire said, 'Hear what the consequences are that overtake those
persons that steal a cow for killing her for food or selling her for
wealth, or making a gift of her unto a Brahmana. He, who, without being
checked by the restraints of the scriptures, sells a cow, or kills one,
or eats the flesh of a cow, or they, who, for the sake of wealth, suffer
a person to kill kine,--all these, viz., he that kills, he that eats, and
he that permits the slaughter,--rot in hell for as many years as there
are hairs on the body of the cow so slain.[364] O thou of great
puissance, those faults and those kinds of faults that have been said to
attach to one that obstructs a Brahmana's sacrifice, are said to attach
to the sale and the theft of kine. That man, who, having stolen a cow
makes a gift of her unto a Brahmana, enjoys felicity in heaven as the
reward of the gift but suffers misery in hell for the sin of theft for as
long a period. Gold has been said to constitute the Dakshina, O thou of
great splendour, in gifts of kine. Indeed, gold has been said to be the
best Dakshina in all sacrifices. By making a gift of kine one is said to
rescue one's ancestors to the seventh degree as also one's descendants to
the seventh degree. By giving away kine with Dakshina of gold one rescues
one's ancestors and descendants of double the number. The gift of gold is
the best of gifts. Gold is, again, the best Dakshina. Gold is a great
cleanser, O Sakra, and is, indeed, the best of all cleansing objects. O
thou of a hundred sacrifices, gold has been said to be the sanctifier of
the entire race of him who gives it away. I have thus, O thou of great
splendour, told thee in brief of Dakshina.'

"Bhishma said, 'Even this was said by the Grandsire unto Indra, O chief
of Bharata's race! Indra imparted it unto Dasaratha, and Dasaratha in his
turn unto his son Rama, Rama of Raghu's race imparted it unto his dear
brother Lakshmana of great fame. While dwelling in the woods, Lakshmana
imparted it unto the Rishis. It has then come down from generation to
generation, for the Rishis of rigid vows held it amongst themselves as
also the righteous kings of the earth. My preceptor, O Yudhishthira,
communicated it to me. That Brahmana, who recites it every day in the
assemblies of Brahmanas, in sacrifices or at gifts of kine, or when two
persons meet together, obtains hereafter many regions of inexhaustible
felicity where he always resides with the deities as his companions. The
holy Brahman, the Supreme Lord, had said so (unto Indra on the subject of
kine).'"



SECTION LXXV

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have been greatly assured, O thou of puissance, by
thee thus discoursing unto me of duties. I shall, however, give
expression to the doubts I have. Do thou explain them to me, O grandsire!
What are the fruits, declared in the scriptures, of the vows that men
observe. Of what nature are the fruits, O thou of great splendour, of
observances of other kinds? What, again, are the fruits, of one's
studying the Vedas properly?[365] What are the fruits of gifts, and what
those of holding the Vedas in memory? What are the fruits that attach to
the teaching of the Vedas? I desire to know all this. What, O grandsire,
are the merits attaching to the non-acceptance of gifts in this world?
What fruits are seen to attach to him who mazes gifts of knowledge? What
are the merits acquired by persons that are observant of the duties of
their order, as also by heroes that do not flee from battle? What are the
fruits that have been declared to attach to the observance of purity and
to the practice of Brahmacharya? What are the merits that attach to the
service of the father and of the mother? What also are the merits of
serving preceptors and teachers, and what are the merits of compassion
and kindness? I desire to know all these, O grandsire, truly and in
detail, O thou that art conversant with all the scriptures! Great is the
curiosity f feel.'

"Bhishma said, 'Eternal regions of felicity become his, who, having
properly commenced a Vrata (vow) completes its observance according to
the scriptures, without a break. The fruits of Niyamas, O king, are
visible even in this world. These rewards that thou hast won are those of
Niyamas and sacrifices. The fruits that attach to the study of the Vedas
are seen both here and hereafter. The person, who is devoted to the study
of the Vedas is seen to sport in felicity both in this world and in the
region of Brahma. Listen now to me, O king, as I tell thee in detail what
the fruits are of self-restraint. They that are self-restrained are happy
everywhere. They that are self-restrained are always in the enjoyment of
that felicity which attaches to the absence or subjugation of desire.
They that are self-restrained are competent to go everywhere at will.
They that are self-restrained are capable of destroying every foe.
Without doubt, they that are self-restrained succeed in obtaining
everything they seek. They that are self-restrained, O son of Pandu,
obtain the fruition of every wish. The happiness that men enjoy in heaven
through penances and prowess (in arms) through gift, and through diverse
sacrifices, becomes theirs that are self-restrained and forgiving.
Self-restraint is more meritorious than gift. A giver, after making a
gift unto the Brahmanas, may yield to the Influence of wrath. A
self-restrained man, however, never yields to wrath. Hence,
self-restraint is superior (in point of merit) to gift. That man, who
makes gifts without yielding to wrath, succeeds in attaining to eternal
regions of felicity. Wrath destroys the merit of a gift. Hence,
self-restraint is superior to gift. There are various invisible places, O
monarch, numbering by ten thousands, in heaven. Existing in all the
regions of heaven, these places belong to the Rishis. Persons, leaving
this world, attain to them and become transformed into deities. O king,
the great Rishis repair thither, aided only by their self-restraint, and
as the end of their efforts to attain to a region of superior happiness.
Hence, self-restraint is superior (in efficacy) to gift. The person, who
becomes a preceptor (for teaching the Vedas), and who duly worships the
fire, taking leave of all his afflictions in this world, enjoys
inexhaustible felicity, O king, in the region of Brahma. That man, who,
having himself studied the Vedas, imparts a knowledge thereof unto
righteous disciples, and who praises the acts of his own preceptor,
attain to great honours in heaven. That Kshatriya, who takes to the study
of the Vedas, to the performance of sacrifices, to the making of gifts,
and who rescues the lives of others in battle, similarly attains to
great, honours in heaven. The Vaisya, who, observant of the duties of his
order, makes gifts, reaps as the fruit of those gifts, a crowning reward.
The Sudra, who duly observes the duties of his order (which consist of
services rendered to the three other orders) wins heaven as the reward of
such services. Diverse kinds of heroes have been spoken of (in the
scriptures). Listen to me as I expound to thee what the rewards are that
they attain to. The rewards are fixed of a hero belonging to a heroic
race. There are heroes of sacrifice, heroes of self-restraint, heroes of
truth, and others equally entitled to the name of hero. There are heroes
of battle, and heroes of gift of liberality among men. There are many
persons, who may be called the heroes of the Sankhya faith as, indeed,
there are many others that are called heroes of Yoga. There are others
that are regarded as heroes in the matter of forest-life, of householding
or domesticity, and of renunciation (or Sannyasa). Similarly, there are
others that are called heroes of the intellect, and also heroes of
forgiveness. There are other men, who live in tranquillity and who are
regarded as heroes of righteousness. There are diverse other kinds of
heroes that practise diverse other kinds of vows and observances. There
are heroes devoted to the study of the Vedas and heroes devoted to the
teaching of the same. There are, again, men that come to be regarded as
heroes for the devotion with which they wait upon and serve their
preceptors, as indeed, heroes in respect of the reverence they show to
their sires. There are heroes in respect of obedience to mothers, and
heroes in the matter of the life of mendicancy they lead. There are
heroes in the matter of hospitality to guests, whether living as
householders. All these heroes attain to very superior, regions of
felicity which are, of course, acquired by them as the rewards of their
own acts. Holding all the Vedas in memory, or ablutions performed in all
the sacred waters, may or may not be equal to telling the Truth every day
in one's life. A thousand horse sacrifices and Truth were once weighed in
the balance. It was seen that Truth weighed heavier than a thousand
horse-sacrifices. It is by Truth that the sun is imparting heat, it is by
Truth that fire blazes up, it is by Truth that the winds blow; verily,
everything rests upon Truth. It is Truth that gratifies the deities, the
Pitris and the Brahmanas. Truth has been said to be the highest duty.
Therefore, no one should ever transgress Truth. The Munis are all devoted
to Truth. Their prowess depends upon Truth. They also swear by Truth.
Hence, Truth is pre-eminent. All truthful men, O chief of Bharata's race,
succeed by their truthfulness in attaining to heaven and sporting there
in felicity. Self-restraint is the attainment of the reward that attaches
to Truth. I have discoursed on it with my whole heart. The man of humble
heart who is possessed of self-restraint, without doubt, attains to great
honours in heaven. Listen now to me, O lord of Earth, as I expound to
thee the merits of Brahmacharya. That man, who practises the vow of
Brahmacharya from his birth to the time of his death, know, O king, has
nothing unattainable! Many millions of Rishis are residing in the region
of Brahma. All of them, while here, were devoted to Truth, and
self-restrained and had their vital seed drawn up. The vow of
Brahmacharya, O king, duly observed by a Brahmana, is sure to burn all
his sins. The Brahmana is said to be a blazing fire. In those Brahmanas
that are devoted to penances, the deity of fire becomes visible. If a
Brahmacharin yields to wrath in consequence of any slight the chief of
the deities himself trembles in fear. Even this is the visible fruit of
the vow of Brahmacharya that is observed by the Rishis. Listen to me, O
Yudhishthira, what the merit is that attaches to the worship of the
father and the mother. He, who dutifully serves his father without ever
crossing him in anything, or similarly serves his mother or (elder)
brother or other senior or preceptor, it should be known, O king, earns a
residence in heaven. The man of cleansed soul, in consequence of such
service rendered to his seniors, has never even to behold hell.'"



SECTION LXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'I desire, O king, to hear thee discourse in detail
upon those high ordinances which regulate gifts of kine, for it is by
making gifts (of kine) according to those ordinances that one attains to
innumerable regions of eternal felicity.'

"Bhishma said, 'There is no gift, O lord of Earth, that is higher in
point of merit than the gift of kine. A cow, lawfully acquired, if given
away, immediately rescues the whole race of the giver. That ritual which
sprang for the benefit of the righteous, was subsequently declared for
the sake of all creatures. That ritual has come down from primeval time.
It existed even before it was declared. Verily, O king, listen to me as I
recite to thee that ritual which affects the gift of kine.[366] In days
of yore when a number of kine (intended to be given away) was brought
(before him), king Mandhatri, filled with doubt in respect of the ritual
he should observe (in actually giving them away), properly questioned
Vrihaspati (the preceptor of the celestials) for an explanation of that
doubt. Vrihaspati said, 'Duly observing restraints the while, the giver
of kine should, on the previous day, properly honour the Brahmanas and
appoint the (actual) time of gift. As regards the kine to be given away,
they should be of the class called Rohini. The kine also should be
addressed with the words--Samange and Vahule--Entering the fold where the
kine are kept, the following Srutis should be uttered,--The cow is my
mother. The bull is my sire. (Give me) heaven and earthly prosperity! The
cow is my refuge!--Entering the fold and acting in this way, the giver
should pass the night there.' He should again utter the formula when
actually giving away the kine.[367] The giver, thus residing with the
kine in the fold without doing anything to restrain their freedom, and
lying down on the bare earth (without driving away the gnats and other
insects that would annoy him as they annoy the kine), becomes immediately
cleansed of all his sins in consequence of his reducing himself to a
state of perfect similitude with the kine. When the sun rises in the
morning, thou shouldst give away the cow, accompanied by her calf and a
bull. As the reward of such an act, heaven will certainly become
attainable to thee. The blessings also that are indicated by the Mantras
will also be thine. The Mantras contain these references to kine: Kine
are endued with the elements of strength and energetic exertion. Kine
have in them the elements of wisdom. They are the source of that
immortality which sacrifice achieves. They are the refuge of all energy.
They are the steps by which earthly prosperity is won. They constitute
the eternal course of the universe. They lead to the extension of one's
race. Let the kine (I give away) destroy my sins. They have that in them
which partakes in the nature of both Surya, and Soma. Let them be aids to
my attainment of heaven. Let them betake themselves to me as a mother
takes to her offspring. Let all other blessings also be mine that have
not been named in the Mantras I have uttered! In the alleviation or cure
of phthisis and other wasting diseases, and in the matter of achieving
freedom from the body, if a person takes the help of the five products of
the cow, kine become inclined to confer blessings upon the person like
the river Saraswati--Ye kine, ye are always conveyers of all kinds of
merit! Gratified with me, do ye appoint a desirable end for me! I have
today become what ye are! By giving you away, I really give myself away.
(After these words have been uttered by giver, the receiver should
say),--Ye are no longer owned by him who gives you away! Ye have now
become mine. Possessed of the nature of both Sutya and Soma, do ye cause
both the giver and the receiver to blaze forth with all kinds of
prosperity!--(As already indicated), the giver should duly utter the
words occurring in the first part of the above verse. The regenerate
recipient, conversant with the ritual that regulates the gift of kine,
should, when receiving the kine in gift, utter (as already) said the
words occurring in the latter half of the above verse. The man who,
instead of a cow, gives away the usual value thereof or cloths or gold,
comes to be regarded as the giver of a cow The giver, when giving away
the usual value of a cow (as the substitute of a cow) should utter the
words,--This cow with face upturned is being given away. Do thou accept
her!--The man who gives away cloths (as the substitute of a cow) should
utter the words,--Bhavitavya--(meaning that the gift should be regarded
as representing a cow). The man who gives away gold (as the substitute of
a cow) should utter the word,--Vaishnavi (meaning, this gold that I give
away is of the form and nature of a cow).--Even these are the words that
should be uttered in the order of the kind of gift mentioned above. The
reward that is reaped by making such vicarious gifts of kine is residence
in Heaven for six and thirty thousand years, eight thousand years, and
twenty thousand years respectively. Even these are the merits,
respectively, of gifts of things as substitute of kine. While as regards
him who gives an actual cow all the merits that attach to vicarious gifts
of kine become his at only the eight step (homewards) of the
recipient.[368] He that gives an actual cow becomes endued with righteous
behaviour in this world. He that gives the value of a cow becomes freed
from every kind of fear. He that gives a cow (as a substitute in way for
a real cow) never meet with sorrow. All the three, as also they that
regularly go through their ablutions and other acts at early dawn, and he
that is well-conversant with the Mahabharata, it is well-known, attain to
the regions of Vishnu and Soma. Having given away a cow, the giver
should, for three nights, adopt the vaccine vow, and pass one night with
kine. Commencing again from that lunation, numbering the eight, which is
known by the name of Kamya, he should pass three nights, supporting
himself entirely on milk and urine and dung of the cow.[369] By giving
away a bull, one attains to the merit that attaches to the divine vow
(Brahmacharya). By giving away a couple of kine, one acquires the mastery
of the Vedas. That man who performs a sacrifice and makes gifts of kine
agreeably to the ritual laid down, attains to many regions of a superior
character. These, however, are not attainable by the person who is
unacquainted with that ritual (and who, therefore, gives away kine
without observing the scriptural declarations). That man who gives away
even a single cow that yields a copious measure of milk, acquires the
merit of giving away all desirable things on Earth collected together.
What need, therefore, be said of the gift of many such kine as yield
Havya and Kavya in consequence of their full udders? The merit that
attaches to the gift of superior oxen is greater than that which attaches
to the gift of kine. One should not, by imparting a knowledge of this
ritual, benefit a person that is not one's disciple or that is not
observant of vows or that is bereft of faith or that is possessed of a
crooked understanding. Verily, this religion is a mystery, unknown to
most people. One that knows it should not speak of it at every place.
There are, in the world, many men that are bereft of faith. There are
among men many persons that are mean and that resemble Rakshasas. This
religion, if imparted unto them, would lead to evil. It would be
productive of equal evil if imparted to such sinful men as have taken
shelter in atheism.--Listen to me, O king, as I recite to thee the names
of those righteous monarchs that have attained to regions of great
felicity as the reward of those gifts of kine which they made agreeable
to the instructions of Vrihaspati, Usinara, Viswagaswa, Nriga,
Bhagiratha, the celebrated Mandhatri the son of Yuvanaswa, king
Muchukunda, Bhagiratha, Naishadha. Somaka, Pururavas, Bharata of imperial
sway to whose race belongs all the Bharatas, the heroic Rama the son of
Dasaratha, and many other celebrated kings of great achievement, and also
king Dilipa of widely known deeds, all, in consequence of their gifts of
kine agreeable to the ritual, attained to Heaven. King Mandhatri was
always observant of sacrifices, gifts, penances, kingly duties, and gifts
of kine. Therefore, O son of Pritha, do thou also bear in mind those
instructions of Vrihaspati which I have recited unto thee (in respect of
gifts of kine). Having obtained the kingdom of the Kurus, do thou, with a
cheerful heart, make gifts of good kine unto foremost of Brahmanas!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Bhishma on the subject of
properly making gifts of kine, king Yudhishthira did all that Bhishma
wished. Verily, king Yudhishthira bore in mind the whole of that religion
which the preceptor of the deities imparted unto the royal Mandhatri.
Yudhishthira from that time began to make always gifts of kine and to
support himself on grains of barley and on cowdung as both his food and
drink. The king also began to sleep from that day on the bare earth, and
possessed of restrained soul and resembling a bull in conduct, he became
the foremost of monarchs.[370] The Kuru king from that day became very
attentive to kine and always worshipped them, hymning their praises. From
that day, the king gave up the practice of yoking kine unto his vehicles.
Wheresoever he had occasion to go, he proceeded on cars drawn by horses
of good mettle.'"



SECTION LXXVII

"Vaisampayana said, 'King Yudhishthira endued with humility, once again
questioned the royal son of Santanu on the subject of gifts of kine in
detail.'

"The king said, 'Do thou, O Bharata, once more discourse to me in detail
on the merits of giving away kine. Verily, O hero, I have not been
satiated with hearing thy nectar-like words!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by king Yudhishthira the just,
Santanu's son began to discourse to him once again, in detail on the
merits attaching to the gift of kine.'

"Bhishma said, 'By giving unto a Brahmana a cow possessed of a calf,
endued with docility and other virtues, young in years, and wrapped round
with a piece of cloth, one becomes cleansed of all one's sins. There are
many regions (in Hell) which are sunless. One who makes the gift of a cow
has not to go thither. That man, however, who gives unto a Brahmana a cow
that is incapable of drinking or eating, that has her milk dried up, that
is endued with senses all of which have been weakened, and that is
diseased and overcome with decrepitude, and that may, therefore, be
likened to a tank whose water has been dried up,--indeed, the man who
gives such a cow unto a Brahmana and thereby inflicts only pain and
disappointment upon him, has certainly to enter into dark Hell. That cow
which is wrathful and vicious, or diseased, or weak or which has been
purchased without the price agreed upon having been paid,--or which would
only afflict the regenerate recipient with distress and disappointment,
should never be given. The regions such a man may acquire (as the rewards
of other acts of righteousness performed by him) would fail to give him
any happiness or impart to him any energy. Only such kine as are strong,
endued with good behaviour, young in years, and possessed of fragrance,
are applauded by all (in the matter of gift). Verily, as Ganga is the
foremost of all rivers, even so is a Kapila cow the foremost of all kine.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Why, O grandsire, do the righteous applaud the gift
of a Kapila cow (as more meritorious) when all good kine that are given
away should be regarded as equal? O thou of great puissance, I wish to
hear what the distinction is that attaches to a Kapila cow. Thou art,
verily, competent to discourse to me on this topic!'[371]

"Bhishma said, 'I have, O son, heard old men recite this history
respecting the circumstances under which the Kapila cow was created. I
shall recite that old history to thee! In days of yore, the Self-born
Brahman commanded the Rishi Daksha, saying,--Do thou create living
creatures! From desire of doing good to creatures, Daksha, in the first
instance, created food. Even as the deities exist, depending upon nectar,
all living creatures, O puissant one, live depending upon the sustenance
assigned by Daksha. Among all objects mobile and immobile, the mobile are
superior. Among mobile creatures Brahmanas are superior. The sacrifices
are all established upon them. It is by sacrifice that Soma (nectar) is
got. Sacrifice has been established upon kine.[372] The gods become
gratified through sacrifices. As regards the Creation then, the means of
support came first, creatures came next. As soon as creatures were born,
they began to cry aloud for food. All of them then approached their
creator who was to give them food like children approaching their father
or mother. Knowing the intention which moved all his creatures, the holy
lord of all creatures, viz., Daksha, for the sake of the beings he had
created, himself drank a quantity of nectar. He became gratified with the
nectar he quaffed and thereupon an eructation came out, diffusing an
excellent perfume all around. As the result of that eructation. Daksha
saw that it gave birth to a cow which he named Surabhi. This Surabhi was
thus a daughter of his, that had sprung from his mouth. The cow called
Surabhi brought forth a number of daughters who came to be regarded as
the mothers of the world. Their complexion was like that of gold, and
they were all Kapilas. They were the means of sustenance for all
creatures. As those kine, whose complexion resembled that of Amrita,
began to pour milk, the froth of that milk arose and began to spread on
every side, even as when the waves of a running stream dashing against
one another, copious froth is produced that spreads on every side. Some
of that froth fell, from the mouths of the calves that were sucking, upon
the head of Mahadeva who was then sitting on the Earth. The puissant
Mahadeva thereupon, filled with wrath, cast his eyes upon those kine.
With that third eye of his which adorns his forehead, he seemed to burn
those kine as he looked at them. Like the Sun tingeing masses of clouds
with diverse colours the energy that issued from the third eye of
Mahadeva produced, O monarch, diverse complexion in those kine. Those
amongst them, however, which succeeded in escaping from the glance of
Mahadeva by entering the region of Soma, remained of the same colour with
which they were born, for no change was produced in their complexion.
Seeing that Mahadeva had become exceedingly angry; Daksha, the lord of
all creatures, addressed him, saying--Thou hast, O great deity, been
drenched with nectar. The milk or the froth that escapes from the mouths
of calves sucking their dams is never regarded as impure remnant.[373]
Chandramas, after drinking the nectar, pours it once more. It is not,
however, on that account, looked upon as impure. After the same manner,
the milk that these kine yield, being born of nectar, should not be
regarded as impure (even though the udders have been touched by the
calves with their mouths). The wind can never become impure. Fire can
never become impure. Gold can never become impure. The Ocean can never
become impure. The Nectar, even when drunk by the deities, can never
become impure. Similarly, the milk of a cow, even when her udders are
sucked by her calf, can never become impure. These kine will support all
these worlds with the milk they will yield and the ghee that will be
manufactured therefrom. All creatures wish to enjoy the auspicious
wealth, identifiable with nectar, that kine possess!--Having said these
words, the lord of creatures, Daksha, made a present unto Mahadeva of a
bull with certain kine. Daksha gratified the heart of Rudra, O Bharata,
with that present, Mahadeva, thus gratified, made that bull his vehicle.
And it was after the form of that bull that Mahadeva adopted the device
on the standard floating on his battle-car. For this reason it is that
Rudra came to be known as the bull-bannered deity. It was on that
occasion also that the celestials, uniting together, made Mahadeva the
lord of animals. Indeed, the great Rudra became the Master of kine and is
named as the bull-signed deity. Hence, O king, in the matter of giving
away kine, the gift is regarded as primarily desirable of Kapila kine
which are endued with great energy and possessed of colour unchanged
(from white). Thus are kine, the foremost of all creatures in the world.
It is from them that the means have flowed of the sustenance of all the
worlds. They have Rudra for their master. They yield Soma (nectar) in the
form of milk. They are auspicious and sacred, and grantors of every wish
and givers of life. A person by making a gift of a cow come to be
regarded as making a gift of every article that is desired to be enjoyed
by men. That man who, desiring to attain to prosperity, reads with a pure
heart and body these verses on the origin of kine, becomes cleansed of
all his sins and attains to prosperity and children and wealth and
animals. He who makes a gift of a cow, O king, always succeeds in
acquiring the merits that attach to gifts of Havya and Kavya, to the
offer of oblations of water unto the Pitris, to other religious acts
whose performance brings peace and happiness, to the gift of vehicles and
cloths, and to the cherishing of children and the old.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of his grandsire, Pritha's
son, viz., the royal Yudhishthira of Ajamida's race, uniting with his
brothers, began to make gifts of both bulls and kine of different colours
unto foremost of Brahmanas. Verily, for the purpose of subduing regions
of felicity in the next, and winning great fame, king Yudhishthira
performed many sacrifices and, as sacrificial presents, gave away
hundreds of thousands of kine unto such Brahmanas.'"



SECTION LXXVIII

"Bhishma said, 'In days of yore, king Saudasa born of Ikshvaku's race,
that foremost of eloquent men, on one occasion approached his family
priest, viz., Vasishtha, that foremost of Rishis, crowned with ascetic
success, capable of wandering through every region, the receptacle of
Brahma, and endued with eternal life and put him the following question.'

"Saudasa said, 'O holy one, O sinless one, what is that in the three
worlds which is sacred and by reciting which at all times a man may
acquire high merit?'

"Bhishma said, 'Unto king Saudasa who stood before him with head bent in
reverence, the learned Vasishtha having first bowed unto kine and
purified himself (in body and mind), discoursed upon the mystery relating
to kine, a topic that is fraught with result highly beneficial to all
persons.'

"Vasishtha said, 'Kine are always fragrant. The perfume emanated by the
exudation of the Amytis agallochum issues out of the bodies. Kine are the
great refuge of all creatures. Kine constitute the great source of
blessing unto all.[374] Kine are the Past and the Future. Kine are the
source of eternal growth. Kine are the root of Prosperity. Anything given
to kine is never lost. Kine constitute the highest food. They are the
best Havi for the deities. The Mantras called Swaha and Vashat are
forever established in kine. Kine constitute the fruit of sacrifices.
Sacrifices are established in kine. Kine are the Future and the Past, and
Sacrifice rest on them. Morning and evening kine yield unto the Rishis, O
foremost of men, Havi for use in Homa, O thou of great effulgence. They
who make gift of kine succeed in transcending all sins which they may
have committed and all kinds of calamities into which they may fall, O
thou of great puissance. The man possessing ten kine and making a gift of
one cow, he possessing a hundred kine and making a gift of ten kine, and
he possessing a thousand kine and making a gift of a hundred kine, all
earn the same measure of merit. The man who, though possessed of hundred
kine, does not establish a domestic fire for daily worship, that man who
though possessed of a thousand kine does not perform sacrifices, and that
man who though possessed of wealth acts as a miser (by not making gift
and discharging the duties of hospitality), are all three regarded as not
worthy of any respect. Those men who make gift of Kapila king with their
calves and with vessel of white brass for milking them,--kine, that is,
which are not vicious and which while given away, are wrapped round with
cloths,--succeed in conquering both this and the other world. Such
persons as succeed in making gift of a bull that is still in the prime of
youth, that has all its senses strong, and that may be regarded as the
foremost one among hundreds of herds, that has large horns adorned with
ornaments (of gold or silver), unto a Brahmana possessed of Vedic
learning, succeed, O scorcher of foes, its attaining to great prosperity
and affluence each time they take birth in the world. One should never go
to bed without reciting the names of kine. Nor should one rise from bed
in the morning without a similar recitation of the names of kine. Morning
and evening one should bend one's head in reverence to kine. As the
consequence of such acts, one is sure to attain to great prosperity. One
should never feel any repugnance for the urine and the dung of the cow.
One should never eat the flesh of kine. As the consequence of this, one
is sure to attain to great prosperity. One should always take the names
of kine. One should never show any disregard for kine in any way. If evil
dreams are seen, men should take the names of kine. One should always
bathe, using cow-dung at the time. One should sit on dried cowdung. One
should never cast one's urine and excreta and other secretions on
cowdung. One should never obstruct kine in any way. One should eat,
sitting on a cowhide purified by dipping it in water, and then cast one's
eyes towards the west, Sitting with restrained speech, one should eat
ghee, using the bare earth as one's dish. One reaps, in consequence of
such acts, that prosperity of which kine are the source[375]. One should
pour libations on the fire, using ghee for the purpose. One should cause
Brahmanas to utter blessings upon one, by presents of ghee. One should
make gift of ghee. One should also eat ghee. As the reward of such acts
one is sure to attain to that prosperity which kine confer. That man who
inspires a vaccine form made of sesame seeds by uttering the Vedic
Mantras called by the name of Gomati, and then adorns that form with
every kind of gems and makes a gift of it, has never to suffer any grief
on account of all his acts of omission and commission,--Let kine that
yield copious measures of milk and that have horns adorned with
gold,--kine viz., that are Surabhis or the daughters of
Surabhis.--approach me even as rivers approach the ocean! I always look
at kine. Let kine always look at me. Kine are ours. We are theirs.
Ourselves are there where kine are!--Even thus, at night or day, in
happiness or woe, verily, at times of even great fear,--should a man
exclaim. By uttering such words he is certain to become freed from every
fear.'"



SECTION LXXIX

"Vasishtha said, 'The kine that had been created in a former age
practised the austerest penances for a hundred thousand years with the
desire of attaining to a position of great pre-eminence. Verily, O
scorcher of foes, they said unto themselves,--We shall, in this world,
become the best of all kinds of Dakshina in sacrifices, and we shall not
be liable to be stained with any fault! By bathing in water mixed with
our dung people shall become sanctified. The deities and men shall use
our dung for the purpose of purifying all creatures mobile and immobile.
They also that will give us away shall attain to those regions of
happiness which will be ours.[376]--The puissant Brahman, appearing unto
them at the conclusion of their austerities, gave them the boons they
sought, saying,--it shall be as ye wish! Do ye (thus) rescue all the
worlds!--Crowned with fruition in respect of their wishes, they all rose
up,--those mothers of both the Past and the Future. Every morning, people
should bow with reverence unto kine. As the consequence of this, they are
certain to win prosperity. At the conclusion of their penances O monarch,
kine became the refuge of the world. It is for this that kine are said to
be highly blessed, sacred, and the foremost of all things. It is for this
kine are said to stay at the very head of all creatures. By giving away a
Kapila cow with a calf resembling herself, yielding a copious measure of
milk, free from every vicious habit, and covered with a piece of cloth,
the giver attains to great honours in the region of Brahma. By giving
away a cow of red complexion, with a calf that resembles herself,
yielding milk, free from every vice, and covered with a piece of cloth,
one attains to great honours in the region of Surya. By giving away a cow
of variegated hue, with a calf similar to herself, yielding milk, free
from every vice, and covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to great
honours in the region of Soma. By giving away a cow of white complexion,
with a calf similar to herself, yielding milk, free from every vice, and
covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to great honours in the region
of Indra. By giving away a cow of dark complexion, with a calf similar to
herself, yielding milk, free from every vice, and covered with a piece of
cloth, one attains to great honours in the region of Agni. By giving away
a cow of the complexion of smoke, with a calf similar to herself,
yielding milk, free from every vice, and covered with a piece of cloth,
one attains to great honours in the region of Yama. By giving away a cow
of the complexion of the foam of water, with a calf and a vessel of white
brass for milking her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to
the region of Varuna. By giving away a cow whose complexion is like that
of the dust blown by the wind, with a calf, and a vessel of white brass
for milking her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to great
honours in the region of the Wind-god. By giving a cow of the complexion
of gold, having eyes of a tawny hue with a calf and a vessel of white
brass for milking her and covered with a piece of cloth, one enjoys the
felicity of the region of Kuvera. By giving away a cow of the complexion
of the smoke of straw, with a calf and a vessel of white brass for
milking her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to great
honours in the region of the Pitris. By giving away a fat cow with the
flesh of its throat hanging down and accompanied by her calf, one attains
with ease to the high region of the Viswedevas. By giving away a Gouri
cow, with calf similar to her, yielding milk, free from every vice, and
covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to the region of the Vasus. By
giving away a cow of the complexion of a white blanket, with a calf and a
vessel of white brass, and covered with a piece of cloth, one attains to
the region of the Sadhyas. By giving away a bull with a high hump and
adorned with every jewel, the giver, O king, attains to the region of the
Maruts. By giving away a bull of blue complexion, that is full-grown in
respect of years and adorned with every ornament, the giver attains to
the regions of the Gandharvas and the Apsaras. By giving away a cow with
the flesh of her throat hanging down, and adorned with every ornament,
the giver, freed from every grief, attains to those regions that belong
to Prajapati himself. That man, O king, habitually makes gifts of kine,
proceed, piercing through the clouds, on a car of solar effulgence to
Heaven and shines there in splendour. That man who habitually makes gifts
of kine comes to be regarded as the foremost of his species. When thus
proceeding to Heaven, he is received by a thousand celestial damsels of
beautiful hips and adorned with handsome robes and ornaments. These girls
wait upon him there and minister to his delight. He sleeps there in peace
and is awakened by the musical laughter of those gazelle-eyed damsels,
the sweet notes of their Vinas, the soft strains of their Vallakis, and
the melodious tinkle of their Nupuras.[377] The men who makes gifts of
kine resides in Heaven and is honoured there for as many years as there
are hairs on the bodies of the kine he gives away. Falling off from
Heaven (upon the exhaustion of his merit), such a man takes birth in the
order of humanity and, in fact, in a superior family among men.'"



SECTION LXXX

"Vasishtha said, 'Kine are yielders of ghee and milk. They are the
sources of ghee and they have sprung from ghee. They are rivers of ghee,
and eddies of ghee. Let kine ever be in my house! Ghee is always my
heart. Ghee is even established in my navel. Ghee is in every limb of
mine. Ghee resides in my mind. Kine are always at my front. Kine are
always at my rear. Kine are on every side of my person. I live in the
midst of kine!--Having purified oneself by touching water, one should,
morning and evening, recite these Mantras every day. By this, one is sure
to be cleansed of all the sins one may commit in course of the day. They
who make gifts of a thousand kine, departing from this world, proceed to
the regions of the Gandharvas and the Apsaras where there are many
palatial mansions made of gold and where the celestial Ganga, called the
current of Vasu, runs. Givers of a thousand kine repair thither where run
many rivers having milk for their water, cheese for their mire, and curds
for their floating moss. That man who makes gifts of hundreds of
thousands of kine agreeably to the ritual laid down in the scriptures,
attains to high prosperity (here) and great honours in Heaven. Such a man
causes both his paternal and maternal ancestors to the tenth degree to
attain to regions of great felicity, and sanctifies his whole race. Kine
are sacred. They are the foremost of all things in the world. They are
verily the refuge of the universe. They are the mothers of the very
deities. They are verily incomparable. They should be dedicated in
sacrifices. When making journeys, one should proceed by their right
(i.e., keeping them to one's left). Ascertaining the proper time, they
should be given away unto eligible persons. By giving away a Kapila cow
having large horns, accompanied by a calf and a vessel of white brass for
milking her, and covered with a piece of cloth, one succeeds in entering,
freed from fear, the palace of Yama that is so difficult to enter. One
should always recite this sacred Mantra, viz.,--Kine are of beautiful
form. Kine are of diverse forms. They are of universal form. They are the
mothers of the universe. O, let kine approach me!--There is no gift more
sacred than the gift of kine. There is no gift that produces more blessed
merit. There has been nothing equal to the cow, nor will there be
anything that will equal her. With her skin, her hair, her horns, the
hair of her tail, her milk, and her fat,--with all these together,--the
cow upholds sacrifice. What thing is there that is more useful than the
cow? Bending my head unto her with reverence, I adore the cow who is the
mother of both the Past and the Future, and by whom the entire universe
of mobile and immobile creatures is covered. O best of men, I have thus
recited to thee only a portion of the high merits of kine. There is no
gift in this world that is superior to the gift of trine. There is also
no refuge in this world that is higher than kine.'

"Bhishma continued, 'That high-souled giver of land (viz., king Saudasa),
thinking these words of the Rishi Vasishtha to be foremost in point of
importance, then made gifts of a very large number of kine unto the
Brahmanas, restraining his senses the while, and as the consequence of
those gifts, the monarch succeeded in attaining to many regions of
felicity in the next world.'"[378]



SECTION LXXXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, what is that which is the most
sacred of all sacred things in the world, other than that which has been
already mentioned, and which is the highest of all sanctifying objects.'

"Bhishma said, 'Kine are the foremost of all objects. They are highly
sacred and they rescue men (from all kinds of sin and distress). With
their milk and with the Havi manufactured therefrom, kine uphold all
creatures in the universe. O best of the Bharatas, there is nothing that
is more sacred than kine. The foremost of all things in the three worlds,
kine are themselves sacred and capable of cleansing others, Kine reside
in a region that is even higher than the region of the deities. When
given away, they rescue their givers. Men of wisdom succeed in attaining
to Heaven by making gifts of kine. Yuvanaswa's son Mandhatri, Yayati, and
(his sire) Nahusha, used always to give away kine in thousands. As the
reward of those gifts, they have attained to such regions as are
unattainable by the very deities. There is, in this connection, O sinless
one, a discourse delivered of old. I shall recite it to thee. Once on a
time, the intelligent Suka, having finished his morning rites, approached
with a restrained mind his sire, that foremost of Rishis, viz., the
Island-born Krishna, who is acquainted with the distinction between that
which is superior and that which is inferior, and saluting him, said,
'What is that sacrifice which appears to thee as the foremost of all
sacrifices? What is that act by doing which men of wisdom succeed in
attaining to the highest region? What is that sacred act by which the
deities enjoy the felicity of Heaven? What constitutes the character of
sacrifice as sacrifice? What is that upon which sacrifice rests? What is
that which is regarded as the best by the deities? What is that sacrifice
which transcends the sacrifices of this world? Do thou also tell me, O
sire, what is that which is the most sacred of all things. Having heard
these words of his son, O chief of Bharata's race, Vyasa, the foremost of
all persons conversant with duties, discoursed as follows unto him.'

"Vyasa said, 'Kine constitute the stay of all creatures. Kine are the
refuge of all creatures. Kine are the embodiment of merit. Kine are
sacred, and kine are sanctifiers of all. Formerly kine were hornless as
it has been heard by us. For obtaining horns they adored the eternal and
puissant Brahmana. The puissant, Brahmana, seeing the kine paying their
adorations to him and sitting in praya, granted unto each of them what
each desired. Thereafter their horns grew and each got what each desired.
Of diverse colours, and endued with horns, they began to shine in beauty,
O son! Favoured by Brahman himself with boons, kine are auspicious and
yielders of Havya and Kavya. They are the embodiments of merit. They are
sacred and blessed. They are possessed of excellent form and attributes.
Kine constitute high and highly excellent energy. The gift of kine is
very much applauded. Those good men who, freed from pride, make gifts of
kine, are regarded as doers of righteous deeds and as givers of all
articles. Such men, O sinless one, attain to the highly sacred region of
kine. The trees there produce sweet fruits. Indeed, those trees are
always adorned with excellent flowers and fruits. Those flowers, O best
of regenerate persons, are endued with celestial fragrance. The entire
soil of that region is made of gems. The sands there are all gold. The
climate there is such that the excellencies of every season are felt.
There is no more mire, no dust. It is, indeed, highly auspicious. The
streams that run there shine in resplendence for the red lotuses blooming
upon their bosoms, and for the jewels and gems and gold that occur in
their banks and that display the effulgence of the morning Sun. There are
many lakes also in that region on whose breasts are many lotuses, mixed
here and there with Nymphoea stellata, and having their petals made of
costly gems, and their filaments adorned with a complexion like that of
gold. They are also adorned with flowering forests of the Nerium odorum
with thousands of beautiful creepers twining round them, as also with
forests of Santanakas bearing their flowery burdens. There are rivers
whose banks are variegated with many bright pearls and resplendent gems
and shining gold. Portions of those regions are covered with excellent
trees that are decked with jewels and gems of every kind. Some of them
are made of gold and some display the splendour of fire. There stand many
mountains made of gold, and many hills and eminences made of jewels and
gems. These shine in beauty in consequence of their tall summits which
are composed of all kinds of gems. The trees that adorn those regions
always put forth flowers and fruits, and are always covered with dense
foliage. The flowers always emit a celestial fragrance and the fruits are
exceedingly sweet, O chief of Bharata's race. Those persons that are of
righteous deeds, O Yudhishthira, always sport there in joy. Freed from
grief and wrath, they pass their time there, crowned with the fruition of
every wish. Persons of righteous deeds, possessed of fame, sport there in
happiness, moving from place to place, O Bharata, on delightful vehicles
of great beauty. Auspicious deed, bands of Apsaras always amuse them
there, with music and dance. Indeed O Yudhishthira, a person goes to such
regions as the reward of his making gifts of kine. Those regions which
have for their lords Pushan, and the Maruts of great puissance, are
attained to by givers of kine. In affluence the royal Varuna is regarded
as pre-eminent. The giver of kine attains to affluence like that of
Varuna himself. One should, with the steadiness of a vow, daily recite
these Mantras declared by Prajapati himself (in respect of kine).
Viswarupa and viz.,--Yugandharah, Surupah, Vahurupah, and
Matara.[379]--He who serves kine with reverence and who follows them with
humility, succeeds in obtaining many invaluable boons from kine who
become gratified with him. One should never, in even one's heart, do an
injury to kine. One should, indeed, always confer happiness on them. One
should, always reverence kine and worship them, with bends of one's head.
He who does this, restraining his senses the while and filled with
cheerfulness, succeeds in attaining to that felicity which is enjoyed by
kine (and which kine alone can confer). One should for three days drink
the hot urine of the cow. For the next three days one should drink the
hot milk of the cow. Having thus drunk for three days hot milk, one
should next drink hot ghee for three days. Having in this way drunk hot
ghee for three days, one should subsist for the next three days on air
only. That sacred thing by whose aid the deities enjoy regions of
felicity, that which is the most sacred of all sacred things, viz., ghee
should then be borne on the head.[380] With the aid of ghee one should
pour libations on the sacred fire. By making gifts of ghee, one should
cause the Brahman to utter benedictions on oneself. One should eat ghee
and make gifts of ghee. As the reward of this conduct, one may then
attain to that prosperity which belongs to kine. That man who, for a
month, subsists upon the gruel of barley picked up every day from cow
dung becomes cleansed of sins as grave as the slaughter of a Brahman.
After their defeat at the hands of the Daityas, the deities practised
this expiation. It was in consequence of this expiation that they
succeeded in regaining their position as deities. Verily, it was through
this that they regained their strength and became crowned with success.
Kine are sacred. They are embodiments of merit. They are high and most
efficacious cleansers of all. By making gifts of kine unto the Brahmanas
one attains to Heaven. Living in a pure state, in the midst of kine, one
should mentally recite those sacred Mantras that are known by the name of
Gomati, after touching pure water. By doing this, one becomes purified
and cleansed (of all sins). Brahmanas of righteous deeds, who have been
cleansed by knowledge, study of the Vedas, and observance of vows,
should, only in the midst of sacred fires or kine or assemblies of
Brahmanas, impart unto their disciples a knowledge of the Gomati Mantras
which are every way like unto a sacrifice (for the merit they produce).
One should observe a fast for three nights for receiving the boon
constituted by a knowledge of the import of the Gomati Mantras. The man
who is desirous of obtaining a son may obtain one by adoring these
Mantras. He who desires the possession of wealth may have his desire
gratified by adoring these Mantras. The girl desirous of having a good
husband may have her wish fulfilled by the same means. In fact, one may
acquire the fruition of every wish one may cherish, by adoring these
sacred Mantras. When kine are gratified with the service one renders
them, they are, without doubt, capable of granting the fruition of every
wish. Even so, kine are highly blessed. They are the essential requisites
of sacrifices. They are grantors of every wish. Know that there is
nothing superior to kine.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by his high-souled sire, Suka, endued
with great energy, began from that time to worship kine every day. Do
thou also, O son, conduct thyself in the same way.'"



SECTION LXXXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard that the dung of the cow is endued with
Sree. I desire to hear how this has been brought about. I have doubts, O
grandsire, which thou shouldst dispel.'[381]

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old story, O monarch, of
the conversation between kine and Sree, O best of the Bharatas! Once on a
time the goddess Sree, assuming a very beautiful form, entered a herd of
kine. The kine, beholding her wealth of beauty, became filled with
wonder.'

"The kine said, 'Who art thou, O goddess? Whence hast thou become
unrivalled on earth for beauty? O highly blessed goddess, we have been
filled with wonder at thy wealth of beauty. We desire to know who thou
art. Who, indeed, art thou? Whither wilt thou proceed? O thou of very
superior splendour of complexion, do tell us in detail all we wish to
know.'

"Sri said, 'Blessed be ye, I am dear unto all creatures. Indeed, I am
known by the name of Sri. Forsaken by me, the Daityas have been lost for
ever. The deities, viz., Indra, Vivaswat, Soma, Vishnu, Varuna, and Agni,
having obtained me, are sporting in joy and will do so for ever. Verily,
the Rishis and the deities, only when they are endued with me, have
success. Ye kine, those beings meet with destruction into whom I do not
enter. Religion, wealth, and pleasure, only when endued with me, become
sources of happiness. Ye kine who are givers of happiness, know that I am
possessed of even such energy! I wish to always reside in every one of
you. Repairing to your presence, I solicit you. Be all of you endued with
Sri.

"The kine said, 'Thou art fickle and restless. Thou sufferest thyself to
be enjoyed by many persons. We do not desire to have thee. Blessed be
thou, go wheresoever thou pleasest. As regards ourselves, all of us are
possessed of good forms. What need have we with thee? Go wheresoever thou
likest. Thou hast already (by answering our questions) gratified us
exceedingly.'

"Sri said, 'Is it proper with you, ye kine that you do not welcome me? I
am difficult of being attained. Why then do you not accept me? It seems,
ye creatures of excellent vows, that the popular proverb is true, viz.,
that it is certain that when one come to another of one's own accord and
without being sought, one meets with disregard. The Gods, the Danavas,
the Gandharvas, the Pisachas, the Uragas, the Rakshasas and human beings
succeed in obtaining me only after undergoing the severest austerities.
You who have such energy, do ye take me. Ye amiable ones, I am never
disregarded by any one in the three worlds of mobile and immobile
creatures.'

"The kine said, 'We do not disregard thee, O goddess. We do not show thee
a slight! Thou art fickle and of a very restless heart. It is for this
only that we take leave of thee. What need of much talk? Do thou go
wheresoever thou choosest. All of us are endued with excellent forms.
What need have we with thee, O sinless one?'

"Sri said, 'Ye givers of honours, cast off by you in this way, I shall
certainly be an object of disregard with all the world. Do ye show me
grace. Ye are all highly blessed. Ye are ever ready to grant protection
unto those that seek your protection. I have come to you soliciting your
protection. I have no fault. Do you rescue me (from this situation). Know
that I shall always be devoted to you. I am desirous of residing in any
parts, however repulsive, of your bodies. Indeed, I wish to reside in
even your rectum. Ye sinless ones, I do not see that ye have any part in
your bodies that may be regarded as repulsive, for ye are sacred, and
sanctifying, and highly blessed. Do ye, however, grant my prayer. Do ye
tell me in which part, of your bodies I shall take up my residence.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by Sri, the kine, always auspicious
and inclined to kindness unto all who are devoted to them, took counsel
with one another, and then addressing Sri, and unto her, O king, these
words.'

"The kine said, 'O thou of great fame, it is certainly desirable that we
should honour thee. Do thou live in our urine and dung. Both these are
sacred, O auspicious goddess!

"Sri said, 'By good luck, ye have shown me much grace implying your
desire to favour me. Let it be even as ye say! Blessed be ye all, I have
really been honoured by you, ye givers of happiness!

"Bhishma continued, 'Having, O Bharata, made this compact with the kine,
Sri, there and then, in the very sight of those kine, rendered herself
invisible. I have thus told thee, O son, the glory of the dung of kine, I
shall once again discourse to thee on the glory of kine. Do thou listen
to me."



SECTION LXXXIII

"Bhishma said, 'They who make gifts of kine, and who subsist upon the
remnants of things offered as libations on the sacred fire, are regarded,
O Yudhishthira, as always performing sacrifices of every kind. No
sacrifice can be performed without the aid of curds and ghee. The very
character as sacrifice which sacrifices have, depends upon ghee. Hence
ghee (or, the cow from which it is produced) is regarded as the very root
of sacrifice. Of all kinds of gifts, the gift of kine is applauded as the
highest. Kine are the foremost of all things. Themselves sacred, they are
the best of cleansers and sanctifiers. People should cherish kine for
obtaining prosperity and even peace. The milk, curds, and ghee that kine
yield are capable of cleansing one from every kind of sin. Kine are said
to represent the highest energy both in this world and the world that is
above. There is nothing that is more sacred or sanctifying than kine, O
chief of Bharata's race. In this connection is recited the ancient
narrative, O Yudhishthira, of the discourse between the Grandsire and the
chief of celestials. After the Daityas had been defeated and Sakra had
become the lord of the three worlds all creatures grew in prosperity and
became devoted to the true religion. Then, on one occasion, the Rishis,
the Gandharvas, the Kinnaras, the Uragas, the Rakshasas, the Deities, the
Asuras, the winged creatures and the Prajapatis, O thou of Kuru's race,
all assembled together and adored the Grandsire. There were Narada and
Parvata and Viswavasu and Haha-Huhu, who sang in celestial strains for
adoring that puissant lord of all creatures. The deity of wind bore
thither the fragrance of celestial flowers. The Seasons also, in their
embodied forms, bore the perfumes of flowers peculiar to each, unto that
conclave of celestials, that gathering of all creatures of the universe,
where celestial maidens danced and sang in accompaniment with celestial
music. In the midst of that assembly, Indra, saluting the Lord of all the
deities and bowing his head unto him with reverence, asked him, saying,
'I desire, O Grandsire, to know why the region of kine is higher, O holy
one, than the region of the deities themselves who are the lords of all
the worlds. What austerities, what Brahmacharya, O lord, did kine perform
in consequence of which they are able to reside happily in a region that
is even above that of the deities?' Thus addressed by Indra, Brahman said
unto the slayer of Vala, 'Thou hast always, O slayer of Vala, disregarded
kine. Hence, thou art not acquainted with the glorious pre-eminence of
kine. Listen now to me, O puissant one, as I explain to thee the high
energy and glorious pre-eminence of kine, O chief of the celestials! Kine
have been said to be the limbs of sacrifice. They represent sacrifice
itself, O Vasava! Without them, there can be no sacrifice. With their
milk and the Havi produced therefrom, they uphold all creatures. Their
male calves are engaged in assisting at tillage and thereby produce
diverse kinds of paddy and other seeds. From them flow sacrifices and
Havya and Kavya, and milk and curds and ghee. Hence, O chief of the
deities, kine are sacred. Afflicted by hunger and thirst, they bear
diverse burdens. Kine support the Munis. They uphold all creatures by
diverse acts, O Vasava, kine are guileless in their behaviour. In
consequence of such behaviour and of many well-performed acts, they are
enabled to live always in regions that are even above ours. I have thus
explained to thee today, O thou of a hundred sacrifices, the reason, O
Sakra of kine residing in a place that is high above that of the deities.
Kine obtained many excellent forms, O Vasava, and are themselves givers
of boons (to others). They are called Surabhis. Of sacred deeds and
endued with many auspicious indications, they are highly sanctifying
Listen to me also, O slayer of Vala, as I tell thee in detail the reason
why kine,--the offspring of Surabhi,--have descended on the earth, O best
of the deities. In day of yore, O son, when in the Devayuga the high
soused Danavas became lords of the three world, Aditi underwent the
severest austerities and got Vishnu within her womb (as the reward
thereof). Verify, O chief of the celestials, she had stood upon one leg
for many long years, desirous of having a son.[382] Beholding the great
goddess Aditi thus undergoing the severest austerities, the daughter of
Daksha, viz., the illustrious Surabhi, herself devoted to righteousness,
similarly underwent very severe austerities upon the breast of the
delightful mountains of Kailasa that are resorted to by both the deities
and the Gandharvas. Established on the highest Yoga she also stood upon
one leg for eleven thousand years. The deities with the Rishis and the
great Nagas all became scorched with the severity of her penances.
Repairing thither with me, all of them began to adore that auspicious
goddess. I then addressed that goddess endued with penances and said, 'O
goddess, O thou of faultless conduct, for what purpose, dost thou undergo
such severe austerities. O highly blessed one, I am gratified with thy
penances, O beautiful one! Do thou, O goddess, solicit what boon thou
desirest. I shall grant thee whatever thou mayst ask.' Even these were my
words unto her, O Purandara. Thus addressed by me, Surabhi answered me,
saying, 'I have no need, O Grandsire, of boons. Even this, O sinless one,
is a great boon to me that thou hast been gratified with me.' Unto the
illustrious Surabhi, O chief of the celestials who said so unto me, O
lord of Sachi, I answered even in these words, O foremost of the deities,
viz., 'O goddess, at this exhibition of thy freedom from cupidity and
desire and at these penances of thine, O thou of beautiful face, I have
been exceedingly gratified. I, therefore, grant thee the boon of
immortality. Thou shalt dwell in a region that is higher than the three
worlds, through my grace. That region shall be known to all by the name
of Goloka. Thy offspring, ever engaged in doing good acts, will reside in
the world of men. In fact, O highly blessed one, thy daughters will
reside there. All kinds of enjoyment, celestial and human, that thou
mayst think of, will immediately be thine. Whatever happiness exists in
Heaven, will also be thine, O blessed one.' The regions, O thou of a
hundred eyes, that are Surabhi's are endued with means for the
gratification of every wish. Neither Death, nor Decrepitude, nor fire,
can overcome its denizens. No ill luck, O Vasava, exists there. Many
delightful woods, and delightful ornaments and objects of beauty may be
seen there. There many beautiful cars, all excellently equipped, which
move at the will of the rider, may be seen, O Vasava, O thou of eyes like
lotus-petals, it is only by Brahmacharya, by penances, by Truth, by
self-restraint, by gifts, by diverse kinds of righteous deeds, by
sojourns to sacred waters, in fact, by severe austerities and righteous
acts well-performed, that one can attain to Goloka. Thou hast asked me, O
Sakra, and I have answered the in full, O slayer of Asuras, thou shouldst
never disregard kine.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Having heard these words of the self-born Brahman, O
Yudhishthira, Sakra of a thousand eyes began from that time to worship
kine every day and to show them the greatest respect. I have thus told
thee everything about the sanctifying character of kine, O thou of greet
splendour. The sacred and high pre-eminence and glory of kine, that is
capable of cleansing one from every sin, has, O chief of men, been thus
explained to thee. That man who with senses withdrawn from every other
object will recite this account unto Brahmanas, on occasions when Havya
and Kavya are offered, or at sacrifices, or on occasions of adoring the
Pitris, succeeds in conferring upon his ancestors an inexhaustible
felicity fraught with the fruition of every wish. That man who is devoted
to kine succeeds in obtaining the fruition of every wish of his. Indeed,
even those women that are devoted to kine succeed in obtaining the
accomplishment of every wish of theirs. He that desireth sons obtaineth
them. He that desireth daughters obtaineth them. He that desireth wealth
succeedeth in aquiring it and he that desireth religious merit succeedeth
in winning it. He that desireth knowledge acquireth it and he that
desireth felicity succeedeth in acquiring it. Indeed, O Bharata, there is
nothing that is unattainable to one that is devoted to kine.'"



SECTION LXXXIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast, O grandsire, discoursed to me on the gift
of kine that is fraught with great merit. In the case of kings observant
of their duties, that gift is most meritorious. Sovereignty is always
painful. It is incapable of being borne by persons of uncleansed souls.
In the generality of cases, kings fail to attain to auspicious ends. By
always making, however, gifts of earth, they succeed in cleansing
themselves (of all their sins). Thou hast, O prince of Kuru's race,
discoursed to me on many duties. Thou hast discoursed to me on the gifts
of kine made by king Nriga in days of old. The Rishi Nachiketa, in
ancient times, had discoursed on the merits of this act. The Vedas and
the Upanishads also have laid down that in all sacrifices,--in fact, in
all kinds of religious acts,--the Dakshina should be earth or kine or
gold. The Srutis, however, declare that in all Dakshinas, gold is
superior and is, indeed, the best. I desire, O grandsire, to hear thee
discourse truly on this topic. What is gold? How did it spring up? When
did it come into existence? What is its essence? Who is its presiding
deity? What are its fruits? Why is it regarded as the foremost of all
things? For what reason do men of wisdom applaud the gift of gold? For
what reason is gold regarded as the best Dakshinas in all sacrifices? Why
also is gold regarded as a cleanser superior to earth itself and kine?
Why, indeed, is it regarded so superior as a Dakshina? Do thou, O
grandsire, discourse to me on all this!'

"Bhishma said, Listen, O king, with concentrated attention to me as I
recite to thee in detail the circumstances connected with the origin of
gold as understood by me. When my father Santanu of great energy departed
from this world, I proceeded to Gangadwara for performing his Sraddha.
Arrived there, I commenced the Sraddha of my father. My mother Jahnavi,
coming there, rendered me great help. Inviting many ascetics crowned with
success and causing them to take their seats before me, I commenced the
preliminary rites consisting of gifts of water and of other things.
Having with a concentrated mind performed all preliminary rites as laid
down in the scriptures, I set myself to duly offer the obsequial cake. I
then saw, O king, that a handsome arm, adorned with Angadas and other
ornaments, rose up, piercing the ground, through the blades of Kusa grass
which I had spread. Beholding that arm rise from the ground, I became
filled with wonder. Indeed, O chief of Bharata's race, I thought that my
father had come himself for accepting the cake I was about to offer.
Reflecting then, by the light of the scriptures, the conviction soon came
upon me that the ordinance does occur in the Vedas that the cake should
not be presented into the hand of him whose Sraddha is performed. Even
this was the conviction that took possession of my mind, viz., that the
obsequial cake should never be presented in this world by a man into the
visible hand of the man whose obsequial rites are performed. The Pitris
do not come in their visible forms for taking the cake. On the other
hand, the ordinance provides that it should be presented on the blades of
Kusa grass spread on the earth for the purpose. I then, disregarding that
hand which constituted an indication of my father's presence, and
recollecting the true ordinance depending upon the authority of the
scriptures respecting the mode of presenting the cake, offered the entire
cake, O chief of the Bharatas, upon those blades of Kusa grass that were
spread before me. Know, O prince of men, that what I did was perfectly
consistent with the scriptural ordinance. After this, the arm of my sire,
O monarch, vanished in our very sight. On that night as I slept, the
Pitris appeared to me in a dream. Gratified with me they said, O chief of
Bharata's race, even these words, 'We have been pleased with thee, for
the indication thou hast afforded today of thy adherence to the
ordinance. It has pleased us to see that thou hast not swerved from the
injunctions of the scriptures. The scriptural ordinance, having been
followed by thee, has become more authoritative, O king. By such conduct
thou hast honoured and maintained the authority of thyself, the
scriptures, the auditions of the Vedas, the Pitris and the Rishis, the
Grandsire Brahman himself, and those seniors, viz., the Prajapatis.
Adherence to the scriptures has been maintained. Thou hast today, O chief
of the Bharatas, acted very properly. Thou hast made gifts of earth and
kine. Do thou make gifts of gold. The gifts of gold is very cleansing. O
thou that art well-conversant with duties, know that by such acts of
thine, both ourselves and our forefathers will all be cleansed of all our
sins. Such gifts rescue both ancestors and descendants to the tenth
degree of the person who makes them.' Even these were the words that my
ancestors, appearing unto me in a dream, said unto me, I then awoke, O
king, and became filled with wonder. Indeed, O chief of Bharata's race, I
set my heart then upon making gifts of gold. Listen now, monarch, to this
old history. It is highly praiseworthy and it extends the period of his
life who listens to it. It was first recited to Rama, the son of
Jamadagni In former days Jamadagni's son Rama, filled with great wrath,
exterminated the Kshatriyas from off the face of the earth for thrice
seven times. Having subjugated the entire earth the heroic Rama of eyes
like lotus-petals began to make preparations for performing a
Horse-sacrifice, O king, that is praised by all Brahmanas and Kshatriyas
and that is capable of granting the fruition of every wish. That
sacrifice cleanses all creatures and enhances the energy and splendour of
those who succeed in performing it. Endued with great energy, Rama, by
the performance of that sacrifice became purified. Having, however,
performed that foremost of sacrifices, the high-souled Rama failed yet to
attain to perfect lightness of heart. Repairing unto Rishis conversant
with every branch of learning as also the deities, Rama of Bhrigu's race
questioned them. Filled with repentance and compassion, he addressed
them, saying, 'Ye highly blessed ones, do ye declare that which is more
cleansing still for men engaged in fierce deeds.' Thus addressed by him,
those great Rishis, fully acquainted with the Vedas and the scriptures,
answered him, saying, 'O Rama, guided by the authority of the Vedas, do
thou honour all learned Brahmanas. Following this conduct for some time
do thou once more ask the regenerate Rishis as to what should be done by
thee for cleansing thyself. Follow the advice which those persons of
great wisdom give.' Repairing then to Vasishtha and Agastya and Kasyapa,
that delighter of the Bhrigus, endued with great energy, asked them that
question, 'Ye foremost of Brahmanas, even this is the wish that has
arisen in my heart. How, indeed, may I succeed in cleansing myself? By
what acts and rites may this be brought about? Or, if by gifts, what is
that article by giving away which this wish of mine may be accomplished?
Ye foremost or righteous persons, if your minds be inclined to do me a
favour, then do tell me, ye that are endued with wealth of asceticism,
what is that by which I may succeed in cleansing myself.'

"The Rishis said, 'O delighter of the Bhrigus, the mortal that has sinned
becomes cleansed by making gifts of kine, of earth, and of wealth. Even
this is what we have heard. There is another gift that is regarded as a
great cleanser. Listen to us, O regenerate Rishi, as we discourse on it.
That article is excellent and is endued with wonderful aspect and is,
besides, the offspring of Fire. In days of yore, the god Agni burnt all
the world. It has been heard by us that from his seed sprung gold of
bright complexion. It came to be celebrated under the name of good
complexioned. By making gifts of gold thou art sure to have thy wish
crowned with fruition. Then the illustrious Vasishtha in especial, of
rigid vows, addressing him, said, 'Hear, O Rama, how gold, which has the
splendour of fire sprang into existence. That gold will confer merit on
thee. In matters of gifts, gold is highly applauded. I shall also tell
thee what is gold, whence it has come, and how it has come to be invested
with superior attributes. Listen to me, O thou of mighty arms, as I
discourse upon these topics. Know this as certain that gold is of the
essence of Fire and Soma. The goat is Fire (for it given, it leads to the
region of the deity of fire); the sheep is Varuna (for if leads to the
region of Varuna the lord of waters); the horse is Surya (for if leads to
the region of Surya); elephants are Nagas (for they lead to the world of
Nagas); buffaloes are Asuras (for they lead to the region of Asuras);
cocks and boars are Rakshasas (for they lead to the regions of the
Rakshasas), O delighter of the Bhrigus; earth is sacrifice, kine, water,
and Soma (for it leads to the merits of sacrifice, and to the region of
kine, of the lord of waters and of Soma). Even these are the declarations
of the Smritis. Churning the entire universe, a mass of energy was found.
That energy is gold. Hence, O regenerate Rishi, compared to all these
objects (which I have named above) gold is certainly superior. It is a
precious thing, high and excellent.'[383] It is for this reason that the
deities and Gandharvas and Uragas and Rakshasas and human beings and
Pisachas hold it with care. All these beings, O son of Bhrigu's race,
shine in splendour, with the aid of gold, after converting it into crowns
and armlets and diverse kinds of ornaments. It is also for this reason
that gold is regarded as the most cleansing of all cleansing things such
as earth and kine and all other kinds of wealth, O prince of men. The
gift of gold, O puissant king, is the highest gift. It is distinguished
above the gifts of earth, of kine, and of all other things, O thou that
art endued with the effulgence of an immortal, gold is an eternal
cleanser. Do thou make gifts of it unto the foremost of Brahmanas as it
is the foremost of cleansing things. Of all kinds of Dakshina, gold is
the best. They who make gifts of gold are said to be givers of all
things. Indeed, they who make gifts of gold come to be regarded as givers
of deities. Agni is all the deities in one, and gold has Agni for its
essence. Hence it is that the person who makes gifts of gold gives away
all the deities. Hence, O chief of men, there is no gift higher than the
gift of gold.'

"Vasishtha continued, 'Hear once more, O regenerate Rishi, as I discourse
upon it, the pre-eminence of gold, O foremost of all wielders of weapons.
I heard this formerly in the Purana, O son of Bhrigu's race. I represent
the speech of Prajapati himself. After the wedding was over of the
illustrious and high-souled Rudra armed with the trident, O son of
Bhrigu's race, with the goddess who became his spouse, on the breast of
that foremost of mountains, viz., Himavat, the illustrious and
high-souled deity wished to unite himself with the goddess. Thereupon all
the deities, penetrated with anxiety, approached Rudra. Bending their
heads with reverence and gratifying Mahadeva and his boon giving spouse
Uma, both of whom were seated together, they addressed Rudra, O
perpetuator of Bhrigu's race, saying, 'This union, O illustrious and
sinless one, of thine with the goddess, is a union of one endued with
penances with another of penances as severe! Verily, it is the union, O
lord, of one possessed of very great energy with another whose energy is
scarcely less! Thou, O illustrious one, art of energy that is
irresistible. The goddess Uma, also is possessed of energy that is
equally irresistible. The offspring that will result from a union like
this, will, without doubt, O illustrious deity, be endued with very great
might. Verily, O puissant lord, that offspring will consume all things in
the three worlds without leaving a remnant. Do thou then, O lord of all
the universe, O thou of large eyes, grant unto these deities prostrated
before thee, a boon from desire of benefiting the three worlds! Do thou,
O puissant one, restrain this high energy of thine which may become the
seed of offspring. Verily, that energy is the essence of all forces in
the three worlds. Ye two, by an act of congress, are sure to scorch the
universe! The offspring that will be born of you two will certainly be
able to afflict the deities! Neither the goddess Earth, nor the
Firmament, nor Heaven, O puissant one, nor all of them together, will be
able to bear thy energy, we firmly believe. The entire universe is
certain to be burnt through the force of thy energy. It behoveth thee, O
puissant one, to show us favour, O illustrious deity. That favour
consists in thy not begetting a son, O foremost of the deities, upon the
goddess Uma. Do thou, with patience, restrain thy fiery and puissant
energy!' Unto the deities that said so the holy Mahadeva having the bull
for his sign, O regenerate Rishi, answered, saying, 'So be it!' Having
said so, the deity that has the bull for his vehicle, drew up his vital
seed. From that time he came to be called by the name, of Urdhvaretas
(one that has drawn up the vital seed). The spouse of Rudra, however, at
this endeavour of the deities to stop procreation, became highly
incensed. In consequence of her being of the opposite sex (and,
therefore, endued with little control upon her temper) she used harsh
words, thus, 'Since ye have opposed my lord in the matter of procreating
a child when he was desirous of procreating one upon me, as the
consequence of this act, ye deities, ye all shall become sonless. Verily,
since ye have opposed the birth of issue from me, therefore, ye shall
have no offspring of your own.' At the time this curse was denounced, O
perpetuator of Bhrigu's race, the deity of fire was not there. It is in
consequence of this curse of the goddess that the deities have become
childless. Rudra, solicited by them, held in himself his energy of
incomparable puissance. A small quantity, however, that came out of his
body fell down on the earth. That seed, falling on the earth, leaped into
a blazing fire and there began to grow (in size and power) most
wonderfully. The energy of Rudra, coming in contact with another energy
of great puissance, became identified with it in respect of essence.
Meanwhile, all the deities having Sakra at their head, were scorched a
good deal by the Asura named Taraka. The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras,
the Maruts, the Aswins, and the Sadhyas all became exceedingly afflicted
in consequence of the prowess of that son of Diti. All the regions of the
deities, their beautiful cars, and their palatial mansions, and the
retreats of the Rishis, were snatched away by the Asuras. Then the
deities and the Rishis, with cheerless hearts, sought the protection of
the illustrious and puissant Brahman of unfading glory.'"



SECTION LXXXV

'The Deities said, 'The Asura named Taraka who has received boons from
thee, O puissant one, is afflicting the deities and the Rishis. Let his
death be ordained by thee. O Grandsire, great has been our fear from him.
O illustrious one, do thou rescue us. We have no other refuge than thee.'

"Brahman said, 'I am equal in my behaviour towards all creatures. I
cannot, however, approve of unrighteousness. Let Taraka, that opponent of
the deities and Rishis, be quickly destroyed. The Vedas and the eternal
duties shall not be exterminated, ye foremost of celestials! I have
ordained what is proper in this matter. Let the fever of your hearts be
dispelled.'

"The Deities said, 'In consequence of thy having granted him boons, that
son of Diti has been proud of his might. He is incapable of being slain,
by the deities. How then will his death be brought about? The boon which,
O Grandsire, he has obtained from thee is that he should not be slayable
by deities or Asuras or Rakshasas. The deities have also been cursed by
the spouse of Rudra in consequence of their endeavour in former days to
stop propagation. The curse denounced by her has been, O lord of the
universe, even this, viz., that they are not to have any offspring.'

"Brahman said, 'Ye foremost of deities, Agni was not there at the time
the curse was denounced by the goddess. Even he will beget a son for the
destruction of the enemies of the gods. Transcending all the deities and
Danavas and Rakshasas and human beings and Gandharvas and Nagas and
feathery creatures, the offspring of Agni with his dart, which in his
hands will be a weapon incapable of being baffled if once hurled at the
foe, will destroy Taraka from whom your fear hath arisen. Verily, all
other enemies of yours will also be slain by him. Will is eternal. That
Will is known by the name of Kama and is identical with Rudra's seed a
portion of which fell into the blazing form of Agni. That energy, which
is a mighty substance, and which resembles a second Agni, will be cast by
Agni into Ganga for producing a child upon her in order to effect the
destruction of the enemies of the gods. Agni did not come within the
range of Uma's curse. The eater of sacrificial libations was not present
there when the curse was denounced. Let the deity of fire, therefore, be
searched out. Let him now be set to this task. Ye sinless ones, I have
told you what the means are for the destruction of Taraka. The curses of
those that are endued with energy fail to produce any effect upon those
that are endued with energy. Forces, when they come into contact with
something that is endued with stronger force, become weakened. They that
are endued with penances are competent to destroy even the boon-giving
deities who are indestructible. Will, or Like, or Desire (which is
identifiable with Agni) sprang in former times and is the most eternal of
all creatures. Agni is the Lord of the universe. He is incapable of being
apprehended or described. Capable of going everywhere and existing in all
things, he is the Creator of all beings. He lives in the hearts of all
creatures. Endued with great puissance, He is older than Rudra himself.
Let that eater of sacrificial libations, who is a mass of energy, be
searched out. That illustrious deity will accomplish this desire of your
hearts.' Hearing these words of the Grandsire, the high-souled gods then
proceeded to search out the god of fire with hearts cheerful in
consequence of their purpose having been achieved. The gods and the
Rishis then searched every part of the three worlds, their hearts filled
with the thought of Agni and eagerly desiring to obtain a sight of him.
Endued with penances, possessed of prosperity, celebrated over all the
worlds, those high-souled ones, all crowned with ascetic success,
sojourned over every part of the universe, O foremost one of Bhrigu's
race. They failed, however, to find out the eater of sacrificial
libations who had concealed himself by merging his self into self.[384]
About this time, a frog, living in water, appeared on the surface thereof
from the nethermost regions, with cheerless heart in consequence of
having been scorched by the energy of Agni. The little creature addressed
the deities who had become penetrated with fear and who were all very
eager to obtain a sight of the deity of fire, saying, 'Ye gods, Agni is
now residing in the nethermost regions. Scorched by the energy of that
deity, and unable to bear it longer, I have come hither. The illustrious
bearer of sacrificial libations, ye gods, is now under the waters. He has
created a mass of waters within which he is staying. All of us have been
scorched by his energy. If, ye gods, ye desire to obtain a sight of
him,--verily, if ye have any business with him,--do ye go to him thither.
Do, indeed, repair thither. As regards ourselves, we shall fly from this
place, ye deities, from fear of Agni.' Having said this much, the frog
dived into the water'. The eater of sacrificial libations learnt of the
treachery of the frog. Coming to that animal, he cursed the whole
batrachian race, saying, 'Ye shall henceforth be deprived of the organ of
taste. Having denounced this curse on the frog, he left the spot speedily
for taking up his abode elsewhere. Verily, the puissant deity did not
show himself. Seeing the plight to which the frogs were reduced for
having done them a service, the deities, O best of the Bhrigus, showed
favour unto those creatures. I shall tell thee everything regarding it.
Do thou listen to me, O mighty-armed hero.'

"The Deities said, 'Though deprived of tongues through the curse of Agni
and, therefore, reft of the sensation of taste, ye shall yet be able to
utter diverse kinds of speech. Living within holes, deprived of food,
reft of consciousness, wasted and dried up, and more dead than alive, all
of you will be held by the Earth nevertheless. Ye shall also be able to
wander about at night-time when everything is enveloped in thick
darkness.' Having said this unto the frogs, the deities once more went
over every part of the earth for finding out the deity of blazing flames.
In spite of all their efforts, however, they failed to get at him. Then,
O perpetuator of Bhrigu's race, an elephant, as large and mighty as the
elephant of Sakra, addressed the gods, saying, 'Agni is now residing
within this Aswattha tree!' Incensed with wrath, Agni cursed all the
elephants, O descendant of Bhrigu saying, 'Your tongues will be bent
back.' Having been pointed out by the elephants, the deity of fire cursed
all elephants even thus and then went away and entered the heart of the
Sami tree from the desire of residing within it for some time. Listen
now, O puissant hero, what favour was shown unto the elephants, O
foremost one of Bhrigu's race, by the deities of unbaffled prowess who
were all gratified with the service a representative of their had done
them.'

"The Deities said, 'With the aid of even your tongues bent inwards ye
shall be able to eat all things, and with even those tongues ye shall be
able to utter cries that will only be indistinct. Having blessed the
elephants in this way, the denizens of Heaven once more resumed their
search after Agni. Indeed, having issued out of the Aswattha tree, the
deity of fire had entered the heart of Sami. This new abode of Agni was
divulged by a parrot. The gods thereupon proceeded to the spot. Enraged
with the conduct of the parrot, the deity of blazing flames cursed the
whole parrot race, saying, 'Ye shall from this day be deprived of the
power of speech.' Indeed, the eater of sacrificial libations turned up
the tongues of all the parrots. Beholding Agni at the place pointed out
by the parrot, and witnessing the curse denounced upon him, the gods,
feeling a compassion for the poor creature, blessed him, saying, 'In
consequence of thy being a parrot, thou shalt not be wholly deprived of
the power of speech. Though thy tongue has been turned backwards, yet
speech thou shalt have, confined to the letter K. Like that of a child or
an old man, thy speech shall be sweet and indistinct and wonderful.'
Having said these words unto the parrot, and beholding the deity of fire
within the heart of the Sami, the gods made Sami wood a sacred fuel fit
for producing fire in all religious rites. It was from that time that
fire is seen to reside in the heart of the Sami. Men came to regard the
Sami as proper means for producing fire (in sacrifice).[385] The waters
that occur in the nethermost regions had come into contact with the deity
of blazing flames. Those heated waters, O thou of Bhrigu's race, are
vomited forth by the mountain springs. In consequence, indeed, of Agni
having resided in them for some time, they became hot through his energy.
Meanwhile, Agni, beholding the gods, became grieved. Addressing the
deities, he asked them, 'What is the reason of your presence here?' Unto
him the deities and the great Rishi said, 'We wish to set thee to a
particular task. It behoveth thee to accomplish it. When accomplished, it
will redound greatly to thy credit.'

"Agni said, 'Tell me what your business is. I shall, ye gods, accomplish
it. I am always willing to be set by you to any task you wish. Do not
scruple, therefore, to command me.'"

"The Deities said, 'There is an Asura of the name of Taraka who has been
filled with pride in consequence of the boon he has obtained from
Brahman. Through his energy he is able to oppose and discomfit us. Do
thou ordain his destruction. O sire, do thou rescue these deities, these
Prajapatis, and these Rishis, O highly blessed Pavaka! O puissant one, do
thou beget a heroic son possessed of thy energy, who will dispel, O
bearer of sacrificial libations, our fears from that Asura. We have been
cursed by the great goddess Uma. There is nothing else then thy energy
which can be our refuge now. Do thou, therefore, O puissant deity, rescue
us all.' Thus addressed, the illustrious and irresistible bearer of
sacrificial libations answered, saying, 'Be it so', and he than proceeded
towards Ganga otherwise called Bhagirathi. He united himself in
(spiritual) congress with her and caused her to conceive. Verily, in the
womb of Ganga the seed of Agni began to grow even as Agni himself grows
(when supplied with fuel and aided by the wind). With the energy of that
god, Ganga became exceedingly agitated at heart. Indeed, she suffered
great distress and became unable to bear it. When the deity of blazing
flames cast his seed endued with great energy into the womb of Ganga, a
certain Asura (bent on purposes of his own) uttered a frightful roar. In
consequence of that frightful roar uttered by the Asura for purposes of
his own (and not for terrifying her), Ganga became very much terrified
and her eyes rolled in fear and betrayed her agitation. Deprived of
consciousness, she became unable to bear her body and the seed within her
womb. The daughter of Jahnu, inseminated with the energy of the
illustrious deity, began to tremble. Overwhelmed with the energy of the
seed she held in her womb, O learned Brahmana, she then addressed the
deity of blazing fire, saying, 'I am no longer capable, O illustrious
one, of bearing thy seed in my womb. Verily, I am overcome with weakness
by this seed of thine. The health I had in days before is no longer mine.
I have been exceedingly agitated, O illustrious one, and my heart is dead
within me, O sinless one. O foremost of all persons endued with penances,
I am in capable of bearing thy seed any longer. I shall cast it off,
compelled by the distress that has overtaken me, and not by caprice.
There has been no actual contact of my person with thy seed, O
illustrious deity of blazing flames! Our union, having for its cause the
distress that has overtaken the deities, has been suitable and not of the
flesh, O thou of great splendour. Whatever merit or otherwise there may
be in this act (intended to be done by me), O eater of sacrificial
libations, must belong to thee. Verily, I think, the righteousness or
unrighteousness of this deed must be thine.' Unto her the deity of fire
said, 'Do thou bear the seed. Do, indeed, bear the foetus endued with my
energy. It will lead to great results. Thou art, verily, capable of
bearing the entire earth. Thou wilt gain nothing by not holding this
energy.' That foremost of streams, though thus passed by the deity of
fire as also by all the other deities, cast off the seed on the breast of
Meru, that foremost of all mountains. Capable (somehow) of bearing that
seed, yet oppressed by the energy of Rudra (for Agni is identical with
Rudra), she failed to hold that seed longer in consequence of its burning
energy. After she had cast it off, through sheer distress, that blazing
seed having the splendour of fire, O perpetuator of Bhrigu's race, Agni
saw her, and asked that foremost of streams, 'Is it all right with the
foetus thou hast cast off? Of what complexion has it been, O goddess? Of
what form does it look? With what energy does it seem to be endued? Do
thou tell me all about it.'

"Ganga said, 'The foetus is endued with the complexion of gold. In energy
it is even like thee, O sinless one! Of an excellent complexion,
perfectly stainless, and blazing with splendour, it has illuminated the
entire mountain. O foremost of all persons endued with penances, the
fragrance emitted by it resembles the cool perfume that its scattered by
lakes adorned with lotuses and Nyphoea stellata, mixed with that of the
Nauclea Cadamba. With the splendour of that foetus everything around it
seemed to be transformed into gold even as all things on mountain and low
land seem to be transformed into gold by the rays of the Sun. Indeed, the
splendour of that foetus, spreading far, falls upon mountains and rivers
and springs. Indeed, it seems that the three worlds, with all their
mobile and immobile creatures, are being illuminated by it. Even of this
kind is thy child, O illustrious bearer of sacrificial libations. Like
unto Surya or thy blazing self, in beauty it is even like a second Soma.'
Having said these words, the goddess disappeared there and then. Pavaka
also, of great energy, having accomplished the business of the deities
proceeded to the place he liked, O delighter of the Bhrigus. It was in
consequence of the result of this act that the Rishis and the deities
bestowed the name of Hiranyaretas upon the deity of fire.[386] And
because the Earth held that seed (after the goddess Ganga had cast it
upon her), she also came to be called by the name of Vasumati. Meanwhile;
that foetus, which had sprung from Pavaka and been held for a time by
Ganga,[387] having fallen on a forest of reeds, began to grow and at last
assumed a wonderful form. The presiding goddess of the constellation
Krittika beheld that form resembling the rising sun. She thenceforth
began to rear that child as her son with the sustenance of her breast.
For this reason, that child of pre-eminent splendour came to be called
Kartikeya after her name. And because he grew from seed that fell out of
Rudra's body, he came to be called Skanda. The incident also of his birth
having taken place in the solitude of a forest of reeds, concealed from
everybody's view, led to his being called by the name of Guha. It was in
this way that gold came into existence as the offspring of the deity of
blazing flames.[388] Hence it is that gold came to be looked upon as the
foremost of all things and the ornament of the very gods. It was from
this circumstance that gold came to be called by the name of
Jatarupam.[389] It is the foremost of all costly things, and among
ornaments also it is the foremost. The cleanser among all cleansing
things, it is the most auspicious of all auspicious objects. Gold is
truly the illustrious Agni. the Lord of all things, and the foremost of
all Prajapatis. The most sacred of all sacred things is gold, O foremost
of re-generate ones. Verily, gold is said to have for its essence Agni
and Soma.'

"Vasishtha continued, 'This history also, O Rama, called Brahmadarsana,
was heard by me in days of yore, respecting the achievement of the
Grandsire Brahman who is identifiable with the Supreme Soul. To a
sacrifice performed in days of yore by that foremost of gods, viz., Lord
Rudra, O thou of great might, who on that occasion had assumed the form
of Varuna, there came the Munis and all the deities with Agni at their
head. To that sacrifice also came all the sacrificial limbs (in their
embodied forms), and the Mantra called Vashat in his embodied form. All
the Samans also and all the Yajushes, numbering by thousands and in their
embodied forms, came there. The Rig-Veda also came there, adorned with
the rules of orthoepy. The Lakshanas, the Suras, the Niruktas, the Notes
arranged in rows, and the syllable Om, as also Nigraha and Pragraha, all
came there and took their residence in the eye of Mahadeva. The Vedas
with the Upanishads, Vidya and Savitri, as also, the Past, the Present,
and the Future, all came there and were held by the illustrious Siva. The
puissant Lord of all then poured libations himself into his own self.
Indeed, the wielder of Pinaka caused that Sacrifice of multifarious form
to look exceedingly beautiful. He is Heaven, Firmament, Earth, and the
Welkin. He is called the Lord of the Earth. He is the Lord whose sway is
owned by all obstacles. He is endued with Sri and He is identical with
the deity of blazing flames. That illustrious deity is called by various
names. Even He is Brahman and Siva and Rudra and Varuna and Agni and
Prajapati. He is the auspicious Lord of all creatures. Sacrifice (in his
embodied form), and Penance, and all the union rites, and the goddess
Diksha blazing with rigid observances, the several points of the compass
with the deities that respectively preside over them, the spouses of all
the deities, their daughters, and the celestial mothers, all came
together in a body to Pasupati, O perpetuator of Bhrigu's race. Verily,
beholding that sacrifice of the high-souled Mahadeva who had assumed the
form of Varuna, all of them became highly pleased. Seeing the celestial
damsels of great beauty, the seed of Brahman came out and fell upon the
earth. In consequence of the seed having fallen on the dust, Pushan
(Surya) took up that dust mixed with the particles of seed from the earth
with his hands and cast it into the sacrificial fire. Meanwhile, the
sacrifice with the sacred fire of blazing flames was commenced and it
went on. Brahman (as the Hotri) was pouring libations on the fire. While
thus employed, the grandsire became excited with desire (and his seed
came out). As soon as that seed came out, he took it up with the
sacrificial ladle and poured it as a libation of ghee, O delighter of the
Bhrigus, with the necessary Mantras, on the blazing fire. From that seed,
Brahman of great energy caused the four orders of creatures to spring
into existence. That seed of the Grandsire was endued with the three
attributes of Sattwa, Rajas, and Tamas. From that element in it which
represented the principle of Rajas, sprang all mobile creatures endued
with the principle of Pravritti or action.[390] From the element of Tamas
in it, sprang all immobile creatures. The principle of Sattwa, however,
which dwelt in that seed, entered both kinds of existences. That
attribute of Sattwa is of the nature of Tejas or Light (being identical
with Buddhi or the Understanding). It is eternal and of it is unending
Space.[391] In all creatures the attribute of Sattwa is present and is
identical with that light which shows what is right and what is wrong.
When the seed of Brahman was thus poured as a libation on that
sacrificial fire, there sprang from it, O mighty one, three beings into
existence. They were three male persons, endued with bodies that partook
of the characters of the circumstances from which they respectively
sprang. One arose first from the flames of the fire (called Bhrig) and
hence he came to be called by the name of Bhrigu. A second came from the
burning charcoals (called Angara) and hence he came to be called by the
name of Angiras. The third sprang from a heap of extinguished charcoals
and he came to be called by the name of Kavi. It has been already said
that the first came out with flames emanating from his body and hence he
was called Bhrigu. From the rays of the sacrificial fire sprang another
called Marichi. From Marichi (afterwards) sprang Kasyapa. It has been
already said that from the (burning) charcoals sprang Angiras. The
(diminutive) Rishis called Valakhilyas sprang from the blades of Kusa
grass spread out in that sacrifice. From the same blades of Kula grass, O
thou of great puissance, sprang Atri. From the ashes of the fire sprang
all those that are numbered among the regenerate Rishis, viz., the
Vaikhanasas, endued with penances and devoted to Vedic lore and all
excellent accomplishments. From the eyes of Agni sprang the twin Aswins
endued with great beauty of person. At last, from his ears, sprang all
the Prajapatis. The Rishis sprang from the pores of Agni's body. From his
sweat sprang Chhandas, and from his strength sprang Mind. For this
reason, Agni has been said to be all the deities in his individual self,
by Rishis endued with Vedic lore, guided by the authority of the Vedas.
The pieces of wood that keep alive the flames of Agni are regarded as the
Months. The Juices that the fuel yields constitute the Fortnights. The
liver of Agni is called the Day and Night, and his fierce light is called
the Muhurtas. The blood of Agni is regarded as the source of the Rudras.
From his blood sprang also the gold-complexioned deities called the
Maitradevatas. From his smoke sprang the Vasus. From his flames sprang
the Rudras as also the (twelve) Adityas of great effulgence. The Planets
and Constellations and other stars that have been set in their respective
orbits in the firmament, are regarded as the (burning) charcoals of Agni.
The first Creator of the universe declared Agni to be Supreme Brahma and
Eternal, and the giver of all wishes. This is verily a mystery.

"After all these births had taken place, Mahadeva who had assumed the
form of Varuna (for his sacrifice) and who had Pavana for his soul, said,
'This excellent Sacrifice is mine. I am the Grahapati in it. The there
beings that first sprang from the sacrificial fire are mine. Without
doubt, they should be regarded as my offspring. Know this, ye gods who
range through the skies! They are the fruits of this Sacrifice.'"

"Agni said, 'These offspring have sprung from my limbs. They have all
depended upon me as the cause of their starting into life. They should,
therefore, be regarded, as my children. Mahadeva in the form of Varuna is
in error in respect of this matter.[392] After this, the master of all
the worlds, the Grandsire of all creatures, viz., Brahman, then said,
'These children are mine. The seed was mine which I poured upon the
sacrificial fire. I am the accomplisher of this Sacrifice. It was I who
poured on the sacrificial fire the seed that came out of myself. The
fruit is always his who has planted the seed. The principal cause of
these births is the seed owned by me.' The deities then repaired to the
presence of the Grandsire and having bowed their heads unto him joined
their hands in reverence and they said unto him, "All of us, O
illustrious one, and the entire universe of mobile and immobile
creatures, are thy offspring. O sire, let Agni of blazing flames, and the
illustrious and puissant Mahadeva who has, for this sacrifice, assumed
the form of Varuna, have their wish (in the matter of the offspring).' At
these words, although born of Brahman, the puissant Mahadeva in the form
of Varuna, the ruler of all aquatic creatures received the firstborn one,
viz., Bhrigu endued with the effulgence of the sun as his own child. The
Grandsire then intended that Angiras should become the son of Agni.
Conversant with the truth in respect of everything, the Grandsire then
took Kavi as his own son. Engaged in procreating creatures for peopling
the earth, Bhrigu who is regarded as a Prajapati thence came to be called
as Varuna's offspring. Endued with every prosperity, Angiras came to be
called the offspring of Agni, and the celebrated Kavi came to be known as
the child of Brahman himself. Bhrigu and Angiras who had sprung from the
flame and the charcoals of Agni respectively, became the procreators of
extensive races and tribes in the world. Verily, these three, viz.,
Bhrigu and Angiras and Kavi, regarded as Prajapati, are the progenitors
of many races and tribes. All are the children of these three. Know this,
O puissant hero. Bhrigu begot seven sorts all of whom became equal to him
in merits and accomplishments. Their names are Chyavana, Vajrasirsha,
Suchi, Urva, Sukra, that giver of boons, Vibhu, and Savana. These are the
seven. They are children of Bhrigu and are hence Bhargavas. They are also
called Varunas in consequence of their ancestor Bhrigu having been
adopted by Mahadeva in the form of Varuna. Thou belongest to the race of
Bhrigu. Angiras begot eight sons. They also are known as Varunas. Their
names are Vrihaspati, Utathya, Payasya, Santi, Dhira, Virupa, Samvarta,
and Sudhan was the eighth. These eight are regarded also as the offspring
of Agni. Freed from every evil, they are devoted to knowledge only. The
sons of Kavi who was appropriated by Brahman himself are also known as
Varunas. Numbering eight, all of them became progenitors of races and
tribes. Auspicious by nature, they are all conversant with Brahma. The
names of the eight sons of Kavi are Kavi, Kavya, Dhrishnu, Usanas endued
with great intelligence, Bhrigu, Viraja, Kasi, and Ugra conversant with
every duty. These are the eight sons of Kavi. By them the whole world has
been peopled. They are all Prajapatis, and by them have been procreated
many offspring. Thus, O chief of Bhrigu's race, hath the whole world been
peopled with the progeny of Angiras, and Kavi and Bhrigu. The puissant
and supreme Lord Mahadeva in the form of Varuna which he had assumed for
his sacrifice had first, O learned Brahmana, adopted both Kavi and
Angiras. Hence, these two are regarded as of Varuna. After that the eater
of sacrificial libations, viz., the deity of blazing flames, adopted
Angiras. Hence, all the progeny of Angiras are known as belonging to the
race of Agni. The Grandsire Brahman was, in olden days, gratified by all
the deities who said unto him, 'Let these lords of the universe
(referring to Bhrigu and Angiras and Kavi and their descendants) rescue
us all. Let all of them become progenitors of offspring (for peopling the
earth). Let all of them become endued with penances. Through thy grace,
let all these rescue the world (from becoming an uninhabited wilderness).
Let them become procreators and extenders of races and tribes and let
them increase thy energy. Let all of them become thorough masters of the
Vedas and let them be achievers of great deeds. Let all of them be
friends to the cause of the deities. Indeed, let all of them become
endued with auspiciousness. Let them become founders of extensive races
and tribes and let them be great Rishis. Let all of them be endued with
high penances and let all of them be devoted to high Brahmacharya, All of
us, as also all these are thy progeny, O thou of great puissance. Thou, O
Grandsire, art the Creator of both, deities and the Brahmanas. Marichi is
thy first son. All these also that are called Bhargavas are thy progeny.
(Ourselves also are so). Looking at this fact, O Grandsire, we shall all
aid and support one another. All these shall, in this way, multiply their
progeny and establish thyself at the commencement of each creation after
the universal destruction.' Thus addressed by them, Brahman, the
Grandsire of all the worlds, said unto them, 'So be it! I am gratified
with you all! Having said so unto the deities he proceeded to the place
he had come from. Even this is what happened in days of old in that
sacrifice of the high-souled Mahadeva, that foremost one of all the
deities, in the beginning of creation, when he for the purposes of his
sacrifice had assumed the form of Varuna. Agni is Brahman. He is
Pasupati. He is Sarva. He is Rudra. He is Prajapati.[393] It is
well-known that gold is the offspring of Agni. When fire is not
obtainable (for the purposes of a sacrifice), gold is used as substitute.
Guided by the indications afforded by the auditions of the Veda, one that
is conversant with authorities and that knows the identity of gold with
fire, acts in this way. Placing a piece of gold on some blades of Kusa
grass spread out on the ground, the sacrificer pours libations upon it.
Upon also the pores of an ant-hill, upon the right ear of a goat, upon a
piece of level earth, upon the waters of a Tirtha, or on the hand of a
Brahmana, if libations are poured, the illustrious deity of fire becomes
gratified and regards It as a source of his own aggrandisement as also
that of the deities through his. Hence, it is that we have heard that all
the deities regard Agni as their refuse and are devoted to him. Agni
sprang from Brahman, and from Agni sprang gold.[394] Hence, it has been
heard by us, that those persons observant of righteousness that make
gifts of gold are regarded as giving away all the deities. The man who
makes gifts of gold attains to a very high end. Regions of blazing
effulgence are his. Verily, O Bhargava, he becomes installed as the king
of kings in heaven. That person who, at sunrise, makes a gift of gold
according to the ordinance and with proper Mantras, succeeds in warding
off the evil consequences foreshadowed by ominous dreams. The man who, as
soon as the sun has risen, makes a gift of gold becomes cleansed of all
his sins. He who makes a gift of gold at midday destroys all his future
sins. He who with restrained soul, makes a gift of gold at the second
twilight succeeds in attaining to a residence with Brahman and the deity
of wind and Agni and Soma in their respective regions. Such a man attains
to auspicious fame in regions of great felicity that belong to Indra
himself. Attaining to great fame in this world also, and cleansed of all
his sins, he sports in joy and happiness. Verily, such a man attains to
many other regions of happiness and becomes unequalled for glory and
fame. His course perfectly unobstructed, he succeeds in going everywhere
at will. He has never to fall down from the regions to which he attains
and the glory he acquires becomes great. Indeed, by making gifts of gold
one attains to innumerable regions of felicity all of which he enjoys for
eternity. That man who, having ignited a fire at sunrise, makes gifts of
gold in view of the observance of a particular vow, succeeds in attaining
to the fruition of all his wishes. It has been said that gold is
identical with Agni. The gift of gold, therefore, is productive of great
felicity. The gift of gold leads to the possession of those merits and
accomplishments that are desired, and cleanses the heart.[395] I have
thus told thee, O sinless one, the origin of gold. O thou of puissance,
hear how Kartikeya grew up, O delighter of Bhrigu's race. After a long
time Kartikeya grew up. He was then, O perpetuator of Bhrigu's race,
chosen by all the deities with Indra at their head, as the generalissimo
of the celestial forces. He slew the Daitya Taraka as also many other
Asuras, at the command of the chief of the celestials, O Brahmana, and
actuated also by the desire of benefiting all the worlds. I have also, O
thou of great might, discoursed to thee on the merits of making gifts of
gold. Do thou, therefore, O foremost of all speakers make gifts of gold.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by Vasishtha, Jamadagni's son of
great prowess then made gifts of gold unto the Brahmanas and became
cleansed of his sins. I have thus told thee, O king, everything about the
merits of the gifts of gold and about its origin also, O Yudhishthira. Do
thou also, therefore, make abundant gifts of gold unto the Brahmanas.
Verily, O king, by making such gifts of gold, thou wilt surely be
cleansed of all thy sins!'"



SECTION LXXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast, O grandsire, discoursed to me, in detail
on the merits that attach to the gift of gold agreeably with the
ordinances laid down in the scriptures as indicated in the auditions of
the Veda. Thou hast also narrated what the origin is of gold. Do thou
tell me now how Taraka met with destruction. Thou hast said, O king, that
Asura had become unslayable by the gods. Do thou tell me in detail how
his destruction was brought about. O perpetuator of Kuru's race, I desire
to hear this from thee. I mean the details of Taraka's slaughter. Great
is my curiosity to hear the narrative.'

"Bhishma said, 'The gods and the Rishis, O monarch, reduced to great
distress (by Taraka's prowess and the conduct of Ganga in casting off
Agni's seed), urged the six Krittikas to rear that child. Amongst the
celestial ladies there were none, save these, that could, by their
energy, bear the seed of Agni in their wombs. The god of fire became
exceedingly gratified with those goddesses for their readiness to sustain
the conception caused by the cast off seed of Agni which was endued with
his own high energy. When the energy of Agni, O king, was divided into
six portions and placed within the channels (leading to the womb), the
six Krittikas began to nourish the portion that each held in her womb. As
the high-souled Kumara, however, began to grow within their wombs, their
bodies being afflicted by his energy, they failed to obtain peace
anywhere (in heaven or on earth). Filled with energy as their bodies
were, the time at last came for delivery. All of them, it so happened, O
prince of men, delivered at the same time. Though held in six different
wombs, yet all the portions, as they came out, united into one. The
goddess Earth held the child, taking it up from a heap of gold. Verily,
the child, endued with excellent form, blazed with splendour even like
the god of Fire. Of beautiful features, he began to grow in a delightful
forest of reeds. The six Krittikas beheld that child of theirs looking
like the morning sun in splendour. Filled with affection for
him,--indeed, loving him very much,--they began to rear him with the
sustenance of their breasts. In consequence of his having been born of
the Krittikas and reared by them, he came to be known throughout the
three worlds as Kartikeya. Having sprung from the seed which had fallen
off from Rudra he was named Skanda, and because of his birth in the
solitude of a forest of reeds he came to be called by the name of Guha
(the secret-born). The gods numbering three and thirty, the points of the
compass (in their embodied forms) together with the deities presiding
over them, and Rudra and Dhatri and Vishnu and Yama and Pushan and
Aryaman and Bhaga, and Angas and Mitra and the Sadhyas and Vasava and the
Vasus and the Aswins and the Waters and the Wind and the Firmament and
Chandramas and all the Constellations and the Planets and Surya, and all
the Ricks and Samans and Yajuses in their embodied forms, came there to
behold that wonderful child who was the son of the deity of blazing
flames. The Rishis uttered hymns of praise and the Gandharvas sang in
honour of that child called Kumara of six heads, twice six eyes, and
exceedingly devoted to the Brahmanas. His shoulders were broad, and he
had a dozen arms, and the splendour of his person resembled that of fire
and Aditya. As he lay stretched on a clump of heath, the gods with the
Rishis, beholding him, became filled with great delight and regarded the
great Asura as already slain. The deities then began to bring him diverse
kinds of toys and articles that could amuse him. As he played like a
child, diverse kinds of toys and birds were given unto him. Garuda of
excellent feathers gave unto him a child of his, viz., a peacock endued
with plumes of variegated hue. The Rakshasas gave unto him a boar and a
buffalo. Aruna himself gave him a cock of fiery splendour. Chandramas
gave him a sheep, and Aditya gave him some dazzling rays of his. The
mother of all kine, viz., Surabhi, gave him kine by hundreds and
thousands. Agni gave him a goat possessed of many good qualities. Ila
gave him an abundant quantity of flowers and fruit. Sudhanwan gave him a
riding chariot and a car of Kuvara. Varuna gave him many auspicious and
excellent, products of the Ocean, with some elephants. The chief of the
celestials gave him lions and tigers and pards and diverse kinds of
feathery denizens of the air, and many terrible beasts of prey and many
umbrellas also of diverse kinds. Rakshasas and Asuras, in large bands,
began to walk in the train of that puissant child. Beholding the son of
Agni grow up, Taraka sought, by various means, to effect his destruction,
but he failed to do anything unto that puissant deity. The god in time
invested Agni's son born in the solitude (of a forest of reeds) with the
command of their forces. And they also informed him of the oppressions
committed upon them by the Asura Taraka. The generalissimo of the
celestial forces grew up and became possessed of great energy and
puissance. In time Guha slew Taraka, with his irresistible dart. Verily,
Kumara slew the Asura as easily as if in sport. Having accomplished the
destruction of Taraka he re-established the chief of the deities in his
sovereignty of the three worlds. Endued with mighty prowess, the
celestial generalissimo blazed with beauty and splendour. The puissant
Skanda became the protector of the deities and did what was agreeable to
Sankara. The illustrious son of Pavaka was endued with a golden form.
Verily, Kumara is always the leader of the celestial forces. Gold is the
puissant energy of the god of fire and was born with Kartikeya (from the
same seed). Hence is Gold highly auspicious and, as a valuable, is
excellent and endued with inexhaustible merit. Even thus, O son of Kuru's
race, did Vasishtha recite this discourse unto Rama of Bhrigu's race in
days of old. Do thou, therefore, O king of men, try to make gifts of
Gold. By making gifts of Gold, Rama became cleansed of all his sins, and
finally attained to a high place in heaven that is unattainable by other
men.'"



SECTION LXXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast discoursed to me, O thou of righteous
soul, on the duties of the four orders. Do thou, after the same manner, Q
king, discourse to me now on all the ordinances respecting the Sraddha
(of deceased ancestors).'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Yudhishthira, the son of
Santanu set himself to declare unto him the following ritual, consistent
with the ordinance of the Sraddha.'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O king, with close attention, to me as I
discourse to you on the ritual of the Sraddha. That ritual is auspicious,
worthy of praise, productive of fame and progeny, and is regarded as a
sacrifice, O scorcher of foes, in honour of the Pitris. Gods or Asuras or
human beings, Gandharvas or Uragas or Rakshasas, Pisachas or
Kinnaras,--every one should always worship the Pitris. It is seen that
people worship the Pitris first, and gratify the deities next by offering
them their adorations. Hence, one should always worship the Pitris with
every care.[396] It is said, O king, that the Sraddha performed in honour
of the Pitris is performable afterwards. But this general rule is
restrained by a special one (which directs that the Sraddha in honour of
the Pitris should be performed on the afternoon of the day of the New
moon).[397] The (deceased) grandsires become gratified with the Sraddha
that may be performed on any day. I shall, however, tell thee now what
the merits and demerits are of the respective lunar days (in view of
their adaptability to the performance of the Sraddha). I shall discourse
to thee, O sinless one, what fruits are attained on what days by
performing the Sraddha. Do thou listen to me with close attention. By
adoring the Pitris on the first day of the lighted fortnight, one obtains
in one's abode beautiful spouses capable of producing many children all
possessed of desirable accomplishments. By performing the Sraddha on the
second day of the lighted fortnight one gets many daughters. By
performing it on the third day, one acquires many steeds. By performing
it on the fourth day, one gets a large herd of smaller animals (such as
goats and sheep) in one's house. They, O king, who perform the Sraddha on
the fifth day, get many sons. Those men who perform the Sraddha on the
sixth day acquire great splendour. By performing it on the seventh day, O
monarch, one acquires great fame. By performing it on the eighth day one
makes great profits in trade. By performing it on the ninth day one
acquires many animals of uncloven hoofs. By performing it on the tenth
day one acquires much wealth in kine. By performing it on the eleventh
day one becomes the possessor of much wealth in clothes and utensils (of
brass and other metals). Such a man also obtains many sons all of whom
become endued with Brahma splendour. By performing the Sraddha on the
twelfth day one always beholds, if one desires, diverse kinds of
beautiful articles made of silver and gold. By performing the Sraddha on
the thirteenth day one attains to eminence over one's kinsmen. Without
doubt, all the young men in the family of him who performs the Sraddha on
the fourteenth day meet with death. Such a man becomes entangled in war,
By performing the Sraddha on the day of the new moon, one obtains the
fruition of every wish. In the dark fortnight, all the days commencing
with the tenth (and ending with that of the new moon), leaving only the
fourteenth day out, are laudable days for the performance of the Sraddha.
Other days of that fortnight are not so. Then, again, as the dark
fortnight is better than the lighted one, so the afternoon of the day is
better than the forenoon in the matter of the Sraddha.'"



SECTION LXXXVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of great puissance, tell me what that object
is which, if dedicated to the Pitris, becomes inexhaustible! What Havi,
again, (if offered) lasts for all time? What, indeed, is that which (if
presented) becomes eternal?'"

"Bhishma said, 'Listen to me, O Yudhishthira, what those Havis are which
persons conversant with the ritual of the Sraddha regard as suitable in
view of the Sraddha and what the fruits are that attach to each. With
sesame seeds and rice and barley and Masha and water and roots and
fruits, if given at Sraddhas, the Pitris, O king, remain gratified for
the period of a month.[398] Manu has said that if a Sraddha is performed
with a copious measure of sesame, such Sraddha becomes inexhaustible. Of
all kinds of food, sesame seeds are regarded as the best. With fishes
offered at Sraddhas, the Pitris remain gratified for a period of two
months. With mutton they remain gratified for three months and with the
flesh of the hare for four. With the flesh of the goat, O king, they
remain gratified for five months, with bacon for six months, and with the
flesh of birds for seven. With venison obtained from those deer that are
called Prishata, they remain gratified for eight months, and with that
obtained from the Ruru for nine months, and with the meat of the Gavaya
for ten months. With the meat of the buffalo their gratification lasts
for eleven months. With beef presented at the Sraddha, their
gratification, it is said, lasts for a full year. Payasa mixed with ghee
is as much acceptable to the Pitris as beef. With the meat of the
Vadhrinasa the gratification of the Pitris lasts for twelve years.[399]
The flesh of the rhinoceros, offered to the Pitris on the anniversaries
of the lunar days on which they died, becomes inexhaustible. The potherb
called Kalasaka, the petals of the Kanchana flower, and meat of the goat
also, thus offered, prove inexhaustible.[400] In this connection, O
Yudhishthira, there are some verses, originally sung by the Pitris, that
are sung (in the world). They were communicated to me in former days by
Sanatkumara.--He that has taken birth in our race should give us Payasa
mixed with ghee on the thirteenth day (of the dark fortnight), under the
constellation Magha, during the Sun's southward course. One born in our
race should, under the constellation Magha, as if in the observance of a
vow, offer the meat of goat or the petals of the Kanchana flower. One
should also offer us, with due rites, Payasa mixed with ghee, dedicating
it on a spot covered by the shadow of an elephant.--Many sons should be
coveted so that even one may go to Gaya (for performing the Sraddha of
his ancestors), where stands the banian that is celebrated over all the
worlds and that makes all offerings made under its branches
inexhaustible.[401] Even a little of water, roots, fruits, meat, and
rice, mixed with honey, if offered on the anniversary of the day of death
becomes inexhaustible.'"



SECTION LXXXIX

"Bhishma continued, 'Listen to me, O Yudhishthira, as I tell thee what
those optional Sraddhas are that should be performed under the different
constellations and that were first spoken of by Yama unto king
Sasavindu.[402] That man who always performs the Sraddha under the
constellation Krittika is regarded as performing a sacrifice after
establishing the sacred fire. Such a person, freed from fear, ascends to
heaven with his children. He that is desirous of children should perform
the Sraddha under the constellation Rohini, while he that is desirous of
energy should do it under the constellation Mrigasiras. By performing the
Sraddha under the constellation Ardra, a man becomes the doer of fierce
deeds. A mortal, by performing the Sraddha under Punarvasu, makes such
again by agriculture. The man that is desirous of growth and advancement
should perform the Sraddha under Pushya. By doing it under the
constellation Aslesha one begets heroic children. By doing it under the
Maghas one attains to pre-eminence among kinsmen. By doing it under the
prior Phalgunis, the doer of it becomes endued with good fortune. By
doing the Sraddha under the later Phalgunis one attains to many children;
while by performing it under Hasta, one attains to the fruition of one's
wishes. By performing it under the constellation Chitra one obtains
children endued with great beauty. By doing it under the constellation
Swati, one makes much profit by trade. The man that desires children
acquires the fruition of his wish by performing the Sraddha under the
constellation Visakha. By doing it under Anuradha one becomes a king of
kings.[403] By making offerings in honour of the Pitris under the
constellation Jyeshtha with devotion and humility, one attains to
sovereignty, O foremost one of Kuru's race. By doing the Sraddha under
Mula one attains to health, and by doing it under the prior Ashadha, one
acquires excellent fame. By performing it under the later Ashadha one
succeeds in roving over the whole world, freed from every sorrow. By
doing it under the constellation Abhijit one attains to high knowledge.
By doing it under Sravana one, departing from this world, attains to a
very high end. The man that performs the Sraddha under the constellation
Dhanishtha becomes the ruler of a kingdom. By doing it under the
constellation presided over by Varuna (viz., Satabhisha), one attains to
success as a physician. By performing the Sraddha under the constellation
of the prior Bhadrapada one acquires large property in goats and sheep;
while by doing it under the later Bhadrapada one acquires thousands of
kine. By performing the Sraddha under the constellation Revati one
acquires much wealth in utensils of white brass and copper. By doing it
under Aswini one acquires many steeds, while under Bharani one attains to
longevity. Listening to these ordinances about the Sraddha, king
Sasavindu acted accordingly, and succeeded in easily subjugating and
ruling the whole earth.'"



SECTION XC

"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoves thee, O foremost one of Kuru's race, to
tell me unto what kind of Brahmanas, O grandsire, should the offers made
at Sraddhas be given away.'

"Bhishma said, The Kshatriya who is conversant with the ordinances about
gift should never examine Brahmanas (when making gifts unto them). In all
acts, however, that relate to the worship of the deities and the Pitris,
an examination has been said to be proper. The deities are worshipped on
earth by men only when they are filled with devotion that comes from the
deities themselves. Hence, one should, approaching them, make gifts unto
all Brahmanas (without any examination of their merits), regarding such
gifts as are made to the deities themselves. In Sraddhas, however, O
monarch, the man of intelligence should examine the Brahmanas (to be
employed for assisting the doers of the Sraddha in getting through the
ritual and making gifts unto them of the offerings made to the Pitris).
Such examination should concern itself with their birth and conduct and
age and appearance and learning and nobility (or otherwise) of parentage.
Amongst the Brahmanas there are some that pollute the line and some that
sanctify it. Listen to me, O king, as I tell thee who those Brahmanas are
that should be excluded from the line.[404] He that is full of guile, or
he that is guilty of foeticide, or he that is ill of consumption, or he
that keeps animals, of is destitute of Vedic study, or is a common
servant of a village, or lives upon the interest of loans, or he that is
a singer, or he that sells all articles, or he that is guilty of arson,
or he that is a poisoner or he that is a pimp by profession, or he that
sells Soma, or he that is a professor of palmistry, or he that is in the
employ of the king, or he that is seller of oil, or he that is a cheat
and false swearer, or he that has a quarrel with his father, or he that
tolerates a paramour of his wife in his house, or he that has been
cursed, or he that is a thief, or he that lives by some mechanical art,
or he that puts on disguises, or he that is deceitful in his behaviour,
or he that is hostile to those he calls his friends, or he that is an
adulterer, or he that is a preceptor of Sudras, or he that has betaken
himself to the profession of arms, or he that wanders with dogs (for
hunting), or he that has been bit by a dog, or he that has wedded before
his elder brothers, or he that seems to have undergone circumcision,[405]
he that violates the bed of his preceptor, he that is an actor or mime,
he that lives by setting up a deity and he that lives by calculating the
conjunctions of stars and planets and asterisms[406], are regarded as fit
to be excluded from the line. Persons conversant with the Vedas say that
the offerings made at Sraddhas, if eaten by such Brahmanas, go to fill
the stomachs of Rakshasas (instead of filling those of the Pitris), O,
Yudhishthira. That person who having eaten at a Sraddha does not abstain
that day from study of the Vedas or who has sexual congress that day with
a Sudra woman, must know that his Pitris, in consequence of such acts of
his, have to lie for a month on his dung. The offerings made at Sraddhas
if presented to a Brahmana who sells Soma, become converted into human
ordure; if presented to a Brahmana who is engaged in the practice of
Medicine, they become converted into pus and blood; if presented to one
who lives by setting up a deity, they fail to produce any fruit; if
presented to one who lives upon the interest of loans they lead to
infamy; if presented to one who is engaged in trade, they become
productive of no fruits either here or hereafter. If presented to a
Brahmana who is born of a widowed mother (by a second husband), they
become as fruitless as libations poured on ashes[407]. They who present
the Havya and Kavya (offered at Sraddhas) unto such Brahmanas as are
divested of the duties ordained for them and of those rules of good
conduct that persons of their order should observe, find such presents
productive of no merits hereafter. That man of little intelligence who
makes gifts of such articles unto such men knowing their dispositions,
obliges, by such conduct, his Pitris to eat human ordure in the next
world. Thou shouldst know that these wretches among Brahmanas deserve to
be excluded from the line. Those Brahmanas also of little energy who are
engaged in instructing Sudras are of the same class. A Brahmana that is
blind stains sixty individual of the line; one that is destitute of
virile power a hundred; while one that is afflicted with white leprosy
stains as many as he looks upon, O king. Whatever offerings made at
Sraddhas are eaten by one with his head wrapped round with a cloth,
whatever is eaten by one with face southwards, and whatever is eaten with
shoes or sandals on all goes to gratify the Asuras. Whatever, again, is
given with malice, and whatever is given without reverence, have been
ordained by Brahmana himself as the portion of the prince of Asuras
(viz., Vali). Dogs, and such Brahmanas as are polluters of lines, should
not be allowed to cast their eyes upon the offerings made at Sraddhas.
For this reason, Sraddhas should be performed in a spot that is properly
hedged around or concealed from the view. That spot should also be strewn
with sesame seeds. That Sraddha which is performed without sesame seeds,
or that which is done by a person in anger, has its Havi robbed by
Rakshasas and Pisachas. Commensurate with the number of Brahmanas seen by
one that deserves to be excluded from the line, is the loss of merit he
causes of the foolish performer of the Sraddha who invites him to the
feast.

'I shall now, O chief of Bharata's race, tell thee who are sanctifiers of
the line. Do thou find them out by examination. All those Brahmanas that
are cleansed by knowledge, Vedic study, and vows and observances, and
they that are of good and righteous behaviour, should be known as
sanctifiers of everything. I shall now tell thee who deserve to sit in
the line. Thou shouldst know them to be such whom I shall indicate
presently. He that is conversant with the three Nachiketas, he that has
set up the five sacrificial fires, he that knows the five Suparnas, he
that is conversant with the six branches (called Angas) of the Veda, he
that is a descendant of sires who were engaged in teaching the Vedas and
is himself engaged in teaching, he that is well-conversant with the
Chhandas, he that is acquainted with the Jeshtha Saman, he that is
obedient to the sway of his parents, he that is conversant with the Vedas
and whose ancestors have been so for ten generations, he that has
congress with only his wedded wives and this at their seasons, and he who
has been cleansed by knowledge, by the Veda, and by vows and
observances,--even such a Brahmana,--sanctifies the line. He who reads
the Atharva-siras, who is devoted to the observance of Brahmacharya
practices, and who is steady in observance of righteous vows, who is
truthful and of righteous conduct, and who is duly observant of the
duties laid down for his order, they also that have undergone fatigue and
labour for bathing in the waters of tirthas, that have undergone the
final bath after performing sacrifices with proper Mantras that are freed
from the sway of wrath, that are not restless, that are endued with
forgiving dispositions, that are self-restrained masters of their senses,
and they are devoted to the good of all creatures,--these should be
invited to Sraddhas. Anything given to these becomes inexhaustible. These
indeed, are sanctifiers of lines. There are others also, highly blessed,
that should be regarded as sanctifiers of the line. They are Yatis and
those that are conversant with the religion of Moksha, and they that are
devoted to Yoga, and they that properly observe excellent vows and they
that, with collected mind recite (sacred) histories unto foremost of
Brahmanas. They that are conversant with Bhashyas, they also that are
devoted to grammatical studies, they that study the Puranas and they that
study the Dharmasastras and having studied them (i.e., the Puranas and
Dharmasastras) act up to the standard laid down in them, he that has
lived (for the stated period) in the abode of his preceptor, he that is
truthful in speech, he that is a giver of thousands, they that are
foremost in (their knowledge of) all the Vedas and the scriptural and
philosophical aphorisms,--these sanctify the line as far they look at it.
And because they sanctify all who sit in the line, therefore are they
called sanctifiers of lines. Utterers of Brahma say that even a single
person that happens to be the descendant of sires who were teachers of
the Veda and that is himself a Vedic teacher, sanctifies full seven miles
around him. If he that is not a Ritwik and that is not a Vedic teacher
takes the foremost seat in a Sraddha, with even the permission of the
other Ritwiks there present, he is said to take (by that act of his) the
sins of all who may be sitting in the line. If, on the other hand, he
happens to be conversant with the Vedas and freed from all those faults
that are regarded as capable of polluting the line, he shall not, O king,
be regarded as fallen (by taking the foremost seat in a Sraddha). Such a
man would then be really a sanctifier of the line. For these reasons, O
king, thou shouldst properly examine the Brahmanas before inviting them
to Sraddhas. Thou shouldst invite only such among them as are devoted to
the duties laid down for their order, and as are born in good families,
and as are possessed of great learning. He who performs Sraddhas for
feeding only his friends and whose Havi does not gratify the deities and
the Pitris, fails to ascend to Heaven. He who collects his friends and
relatives only on the occasion of the Sraddha he performs (without
keeping an eye on properly honouring deserving persons by inviting and
feeding them), fails to proceed (after death) by the path of the deities
(which is a lighted one and free from all afflictions and impediments).
The man who makes the Sraddha he performs an occasion for only gathering
his friends, never succeeds in ascending to heaven. Verily, the man who
converts the Sraddha into an occasion for treating his friends, becomes
dissociated from heaven even like a bird dissociated from the perch when
the chain tying it breaks.[408] Therefore, he that performs a Sraddha
should not honour (on such occasions) his friends. He may make gifts of
wealth unto them on other occasions by collecting them together. The Havi
and the Kavi offered at Sraddhas should be served unto them that are
neither friends nor foes but are only indifferent or neutral. As seed
sown on a sterile soil does not sprout forth, or as one that has not sown
does not get a share of the produce, even so that Sraddha the offerings
in which are eaten by an unworthy person, yields no fruit either here or
hereafter.[409] That Brahmana who is destitute of Vedic study is like a
fire made by burning grass or straw; and becomes soon extinguished even
like such a fire. The offerings made at Sraddhas should not be given to
him even as libations should not be poured on the ashes of the
sacrificial fire. When the offerings made at Sraddhas are exchanged by
the performers with one another (instead of being given away unto worthy
persons), they come to be regarded as Pisacha presents. Such offerings
gratify neither the gods nor the Pitris. Instead of reaching the other
world, they wander about even here like a cow that has lost her calf
wandering about within the fold. As those libations of ghee that are
poured upon the extinguished ashes of a sacrificial fire never reach
either the gods or the Pitris, after the same manner a gift that is made
to a dancer or a singer or a Dakshina presented to a lying or deceitful
person, produces no merit. The Dakshina that is presented to a lying or
deceitful person destroys both the giver and the receiver without
benefiting them in any respect. Such a Dakshina is destructive and highly
censurable. The Pitris of the person making it have to fall down from the
path of the deities. The gods know them to be Brahmanas who always tread,
O Yudhishthira, within the bounds set up by the Rishis who are conversant
with all duties, and who have a firm faith in their efficacy. Those
Brahmanas that are devoted to Vedic study, to knowledge, to penances, and
to acts, O Bharata, should be known as Rishis. The offerings made at
Sraddhas should be given unto those that are devoted to knowledge.
Verily, they are to be regarded as men who never speak ill of the
Brahmanas. Those men should never be fed on occasions of Sraddhas who
speak ill of Brahmanas in course of conversation in the midst of
assemblies. If Brahmanas, O king, be calumniated, they would destroy
three generations of the calumniator.[410] This is the declaration, O
king, of the Vaikhanasa Rishis. Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas
should be examined from a distance. Whether one likes them or feels a
dislike for them, one should give unto such Brahmanas the offerings made
at Sraddhas. That man who feeds thousands upon thousands of false
Brahmanas acquires merit that is attainable by feeding even one Brahmana
if the latter happens to be possessed of a knowledge of the Vedas, O
Bharata!"



SECTION XCI

"Yudhishthira said, 'By whom was the Sraddha first conceived and at what
time? What also is its essence? During the time when the world was
peopled by only the descendants of Bhrigu and Angiras; who was the muni
that established the Sraddha? What acts should not be done at Sraddha?
What are those Sraddhas in which fruits and roots are to be offered? What
species' also of paddy should be avoided in Sraddhas? Do thou tell me all
this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen to me, O ruler of men, as I tell thee how the
Sraddha was introduced, the time of such introduction, the essences of
the rite, and the Muni who conceived it. From the Self-born Brahman
sprang Atri, O thou of Kuru's race. In Atri's race was born a Muni of the
name of Dattatreya. Dattatreya got a son of the name of Nimi possessed of
wealth of asceticism. Nimi got a son named Srimat who was endued with
great beauty of person. Upon the expiration of a full thousand years,
Srimat, having undergone the severest austerities, succumbed to the
influence of Time and departed from this world. His sire Nimi, having
performed the Purificatory rites according to the ritual laid down in the
ordinance, became filled with great grief, thinking continually of the
loss of his son.[411] Thinking of that cause of sorrow the high-souled
Nimi collected together various agreeable objects (of food and drink) on
the fourteenth day of the moon. The next morning he rose from bed. Pained
his heart was with grief, as he rose from sleep that day--he succeeded in
withdrawing it from the one object upon which it had been working. His
understanding succeeded in busying itself with other matters. With
concentrated attention he then conceived the idea of a Sraddha. All those
articles of his own food, consisting of fruits and roots, and all those
kinds of staple grains that were agreeable to him, were carefully thought
of by that sage possessed of wealth of penances. On the day of the New
moon he invited a number of adorable Brahmanas (to his asylum). Possessed
of great wisdom, Nimi caused them to be seated on seats (of Kusa grass)
and honoured them by going around their persons. Approaching seven such
Brahmanas whom he had brought to his abode together, the puissant Nimi
gave unto them food consisting of Syamaka rice, unmixed with salt.
Towards the feet of those Brahmanas engaged in eating the food that was
served unto them a number of Kusa blades was spread out on the seats they
occupied, with the top ends of the blades directed towards the south.
With a pure body and mind and with concentrated attention, Nimi, having
placed those blades of sacred grass in the way indicated, offered cakes
of rice unto his dead son, uttering his name and family. Having done
this, that foremost of Munis became filled with regret at the idea of
having achieved an act that had not (to his knowledge) been laid down in
any of the scriptures. Indeed, filled with regret he began to think of
what he had done.[412] 'Never done before by the Munis, alas, what have I
done! How shall I (for having done an act that has not been ordained)
avoid being cursed by the Brahmanas (as an introducer of strange rites)?'
He then thought of the original progenitor of his race. As soon as he was
thought of, Atri endued with wealth of penances came there. Beholding him
exceedingly afflicted with grief on account of the death of his son, the
immortal Atri comforted him with agreeable counsels. He said unto him, 'O
Mini, this rite that thou hast conceived, is a sacrifice in honour of the
Pitris. Let no fear be thine, O thou that art possessed of the wealth of
asceticism! The Grandsire Brahman himself, in days of old, laid it down!
This rite that thou hast conceived has been ordained by the Self-born
himself. Who else than the Self-born could ordain this ritual in
Sraddhas? I shall presently tell thee, O son, the excellent ordinance
laid down in respect of Sraddhas. Ordained by the Self-born himself, O
son, do thou follow it. Listen to me first! Having first performed the
Karana on the sacred fire with the aid of Mantras, O thou that art
possessed of wealth of penances, one should always pour libations next
unto the deity of fire, and Soma, and Varuna. Unto the Viswedevas also,
who are always the companions of the Pitris, the Self-born then ordained
a portion of the offerings. The Earth also, as the goddess that sustains
the offerings made at Sraddhas, should then be praised under the names of
Vaishnavi, Kasyapi, and the inexhaustible.[413] When water is being
fetched for the Sraddha, the deity Varuna of great puissance should be
praised. After this, both Agni and Soma should be invoked with reverence
and gratified (with libations), O sinless one. Those deities that are
called by the name of Pitris were created by the Self-born. Others also,
highly blessed, viz., the Ushnapsa, were created by him. For all these
shares have been ordained of the offerings made at Sraddhas. By adoring
all these deities at Sraddhas, the ancestors of the persons performing
them become freed from all sins. The Pitris referred to above as those
created by the Self-born number seven. The Viswedevas having Agni for
their mouth (for it is through Agni that they feed), have been mentioned
before. I shall now mention the names of those high-souled deities who
deserve shares of the offerings made at Sraddhas. Those names at Vala,
Dhriti, Vipapa, Punyakrit, Pavana, Parshni, Kshemak, Divysanu, Vivaswat,
Viryavat, Hrimat, Kirtimat, Krita, Jitatman, Munivirya, Diptaroman,
Bhayankara, Anukarman, Pratia, Pradatri, Ansumat, Sailabha, Parama
krodhi, Dhiroshni, Bhupati, Sraja, Vajrin, and Vari,--these are the
eternal Viswedevas. There are others also whose names are Vidyutvarchas,
Somavarchas, and Suryasri. Others also are numbered amongst them, viz.,
Somapa, Suryasavitra, Dattatman, Pundariyaka, Ushninabha, Nabhoda,
Viswayu, Dipti, Chamuhara, Suresa, Vyomari, Sankara Bhava, Isa, Kartri,
Kriti, Daksha, Bhuvana, Divya, Karmakrit, Ganita Panchavirya, Aditya,
Rasmimat, Saptakrit, Somavachas, Viswakrit, Kavi, Anugoptri, Sugoptri,
Naptri, and Iswara:--these highly blessed ones are numbered as the
Viswedevas. They are eternal and conversant with all that occurs in Time.
The species of paddy which should not be offered at Sraddhas are those
called Kodrava, and Pulka. Assafoetida also, among articles used in
cooking, should not be offered, as also onions and garlic, the produce of
the Moringa pterygosperma, Bauhinia Variegata, the meat of animals slain
with envenomed shafts all varieties of Sucuribita Pepo, Sucuribita
lagenaria, and black salt. The other articles that should not be offered
at Sraddhas are the flesh of the domesticated hog, the meat of all
animals not slaughtered at sacrifices, Nigella sativa, salt of the
variety called Vid, the potherb that is called Sitapaki, all sprouts
(like those of the bamboo), and also the Trapa bispinosa. All kinds of
salt should be excluded from the offerings made at Sraddhas, and also the
fruits of the Eugenia Jamblana. All articles, again, upon which any one
has spat or upon which tears have fallen should not be offered at
Sraddhas. Among offerings made to the Pitris or with the Havya and Kavya
offered to the deities, the potherb called Sudarsana (Menispermum
tomentosum, Rox) should not be included. Havi mixed with this is not
acceptable to Pitris. From the place where the Sraddha is being
performed, the Chandala and the Swapacha should be excluded, as also all
who wear clothes steeped in yellow, and persons affected with leprosy, or
one who has been excasted (for transgressions), or one who is guilty of
Brahmanicide, or a Brahmana of mixed descent or one who is the relative
of an excasted man. These all should be excluded by persons possessed of
wisdom from the place where a Sraddha is being performed,' Having said
these words in days of old unto the Rishi Nimi of his own race, the
illustrious Atri possessed of wealth of penances then went back to the
Grandsire's assembly in Heaven.'"



SECTION XCII

"Bhishma said, 'After Nimi had acted in the way described above, all the
great Rishis began to perform the sacrifice in honour of the Pitris
(called the Sraddha) according to rites laid down in the ordinance.
Firmly devoted to the discharge of all duties, the Rishis, having
performed Sraddhas, began to also offer oblations (unto the Pitris) of
sacred waters, with attention. In consequence, however, of the offerings
made by persons of all classes (unto the Pitris), the Pitris began to
digest that food. Soon they, and the deities also with them, became
afflicted with indigestion. Indeed, afflicted with the heaps of food that
all persons began to give them, they repaired to the presence of Soma.
Approaching Soma they said, 'Alas, great is our affliction in consequence
of the food that is offered to us at Sraddhas. Do thou ordain what is
necessary for our ease.' Unto them Soma answered, saying, 'If, ye gods,
ye are desirous of obtaining ease, do ye repair then into the abode of
the Self-born. Even he will do what is for your good.' At these words of
Soma, the deities and the Pitris then proceeded, O Bharata, to the
Grandsire where he was seated on the summit of the mountains of Meru.'

"The deities, 'O illustrious one, with the food that is offered us in
sacrifices and Sraddhas, we are being exceedingly afflicted. O lord, show
us grace and do what would be for our good.' Hearing these words of
theirs, the Self-born said unto them in reply, 'Here, the god of fire is
sitting beside me, Even he will do what is for your benefit.'

"Agni said, 'Ye sires, when a Sraddha comes, we shall together eat the
offerings made to us. If ye eat those offerings with me, ye shall then,
without doubt, succeed in digesting them easily.' Hearing these words of
the deity of fire, the Pitris became easy of heart. It is for this reason
also that in making offerings at Sraddhas a share is first offered to the
deity of fire, O king. If a portion of the offerings be first made to the
deity of fire at a Sraddha, O prince of men, Rakshasas of regenerate
origin cannot then do any injury to such a Sraddha.[414] Beholding the
deity of fire at a Sraddha Rakshasas fly away from it. The ritual of the
Sraddha is that the cake should first be offered to the (deceased) sire.
Next, one should be offered to the grandsire. Next should one be offered
to the great-grandsire. Even this is the ordinance in respect of the
Sraddha. Over every cake that is offered, the offerer should, with
concentrated attention, utter the Savitri Mantras. This other Mantra also
should be uttered, viz., unto Soma who is fond of the Pitris. A woman
that has become impure in consequence of the advent of her season, or one
whose ears have been cut off, should not be allowed to remain where a
Sraddha is being performed. Nor should a woman (for cooking the rice to
be offered in the Sraddha) be brought from a Gotra other than that of the
person who is performing the Sraddha.[414] While crossing river, one
should offer oblations of water unto one's Pitris, naming them all.
Indeed, when one comes upon a river one should gratify one's Pitris with
oblations of water. Having offered oblations of water first unto the
ancestors of one's own race, one should next offer such oblations to
one's (deceased) friends and relatives. When one crosses a stream on a
car unto which is yoked a couple of oxen of variegated hue, or from them
that cross a stream on boats, the Pitris expect oblations of water. Those
that know this always offer oblations of water with concentrated
attention unto the Pitris, Every fortnight on the day of the New moon,
one should make offerings unto one's deceased ancestors. Growth,
longevity, energy, and prosperity become all attainable through devotion
to the Pitris. The Grandsire Brahman, Pulastya, Vasishtha, Pulaha,
Angiras, Kratu and the great Rishi Kasyapa--these, O prince of Kuru's
race, and regarded as great masters of Yoga. They are numbered among the
Pitris. Even this is the high ritual in respect of the Sraddha, O
monarch! Through Sraddhas performed on earth the deceased members of one
race become freed from a position of misery. I have thus, O prince of
Kuru's race, expounded to thee agreeably with the scriptures, the
ordinances in respect of Sraddhas. I shall once more discourse to thee on
gifts."



SECTION XCIII



"Yudhishthira said, 'If Brahmanas that are in the observance of a vow
(viz., fast) eat, at the invitation of a Brahmana, the Havi (offered at a
Sraddha), can they be charged with the transgression or a violation of
their vow, or should they refuse the invitation of a Brahmana when such
invitation is received by them? Tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'Let those Brahmanas eat, impelled by desire, who are
observant of such vows as are not indicated in the Vedas. As regards
those Brahmanas, however, that are observant of such vows are indicated
in the Vedas, they are regarded as guilty of a breach of their vow, O
Yudhishthira, by eating the Havi of a Sraddha at the request of him who
performs the Sraddha.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Some people say that fast is a penance. Is penance
really identifiable with fast or is it not so? Tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'People do regard a regular fast for a month or a half
month as a penance. The truth, however, is that one who mortifies one's
own body is not to be regarded either as an ascetic or as one conversant
with duty[415]. Renunciation, however, is regarded as the best of
penances. A Brahmana should always be an abstainer from food, and observe
the vow called Brahmacharya.[416] A Brahmana should always practise
self-denial restraining even speech, and recite the Vedas. The Brahmana
should marry and surround himself with children and relatives, from
desire of achieving righteousness. He should never sleep. He should
abstain from meat. He should always read the Vedas and the scriptures. He
should always speak the truth, and practise self-denial. He should eat
Vighasa (viz., what remains after serving the deities and guests).
Indeed, he should be hospitable towards all that come to his abode. He
should always eat Amrita (viz., the food that remains in the house after
all the family, including guests and servants have eaten) He should duly
observe all rites and perform sacrifices.'"

"Yudhishthira said, "How may one come to be regarded as always observant
of fasts? How may one become observant of vows? How, O king, may one come
to be an eater of Vighasa? By doing what may one be said to be found of
guest?'"

"Bhishma said, 'He who takes food only morning and evening at the
prescribed hours and abstains from all food during the interval between,
is said to be an abstainer from food. He who has congress with only his
wedded wife and that only at her season, is said to be observant of the
vow of Brahmacharya. By always making gifts, one comes to be regarded as
truthful in speech. By abstaining from all meat obtained from animals
slaughtered for nothing, one becomes an abstainer from meat.[417] By
making gifts one becomes cleansed of all sins, and by abstaining from
sleep during daytime one comes to be regarded as always awake. He who
always eats what remains after serving the needs of guests and servants
is said to always eat Amrita. He who abstains from eating till Brahmanas
have eaten (of that food), is regarded as conquering heaven by such
abstention. He who eats what remains after serving the deities, the
Pitris, and relatives and dependants, is said to eat Vighasa. Such men
acquire many regions of felicity in the abode of Brahman himself. There,
O king, they dwell in the company of Apsaras and Gandharvas. Indeed, they
sport and enjoy all sports of delight in those regions, with the deities
and guests and the Pitris in their company, and surrounded by their own
children and grandchildren. Even such becomes their high end.'"

"Yudhishthira said, 'People are seen to make diverse kinds of gifts unto
the Brahmanas. What, however, is the difference, O grandsire, between the
giver and the receiver?'"

"Bhishma said, 'The Brahmana accepts gifts from him that is righteous,
and from him that is unrighteous. If the giver happens to be righteous,
the receiver incurs little fault. If on the other hand, the giver happens
to be unrighteous the receiver sinks in hell. In this connection is cited
an old history of the conversation between Vrishadarbhi and the seven
Rishis, O Bharata. Kasyapa and Atri and Vasishtha and Bharadwaja and
Gautama and Viswamitra and Jamadagni, and the chaste Arundhati (the wife
of Vasishtha), all had a common maidservant whose name was Ganda. A Sudra
of the name of Pasusakha married Ganda and became her husband. Kasyapa
and others, in days of old, observed the austerest penances and roved
over the world, desirous of attaining to the eternal region of Brahman by
the aid of Yoga-meditation. About that time, O delighter of the Kurus,
there occurred a severe drought. Afflicted by hunger, the whole world of
living creatures became exceedingly weak. At a sacrifice which had been
performed in former times by Sivi's son he had given away unto the
Ritwiks a son of his as the sacrificial present. About this time,
unendued with longevity as the prince was, he died of starvation. The
Rishis named, afflicted with hunger, approached the dead prince and sat
surrounding him. Indeed, those foremost of Rishis, beholding the son of
him at whose sacrifice they had officiated, O Bharata, thus dead of
starvation, began to cook the body in a vessel, impelled by the pangs of
hunger. All food having disappeared from the world of men, those
ascetics, desirous of saving their lives, had recourse, for purposes of
sustenance, to such a miserable shift. While they were thus employed.
Vrishadarbha's son, viz., king Saivya, in course of his roving, came upon
those Rishis. Indeed, he met them on his way, engaged in cooking the dead
body, impelled by the pangs of hunger.'"

"The son of Vrishadarbha said, 'The acceptance of a gift (from me) will
immediately relieve you all. Do you, therefore, accept a gift for the
support of your bodies! Ye ascetics endued with wealth of penances,
listen to me as I declare what wealth I have! That Brahmana who solicits
me (for gifts) is ever dear to me. Verily, I shall give unto you a
thousand mules. Unto each of you I shall give a thousand kine of white
hair, foremost in speed, each accompanied by a bull, and each having a
well-born calf, and, therefore, yielding milk. I shall also give unto you
a thousand bulls of white complexion and of the best breed and capable of
bearing heavy burdens. I shall also give you a large number of kine, of
good disposition, the foremost of their kind, all fat, and each of which,
having brought forth her first calf, is quick with her second.[418] Tell
me what else I shall give of foremost villages, of grain, of barley, and
of even the rarer and costly jewels. Do not seek to eat this food that is
inedible. Tell me what I should give unto you for the support of your
bodies!'

"The Rishis said, 'O king, an acceptance of gifts from a monarch is very
sweet at first but it is poison in the end. Knowing this well, why do
you, O king, tempt us then with these offers? The body of the Brahmana is
the field of the deities. By penance, it is purified. Then again, by
gratifying the Brahmana, one gratifies the deities. If a Brahmana accepts
the gifts made to him by the king, he loses, by such acceptance, the
merit that he would otherwise acquire by his penances that day. Indeed,
such acceptance consumes that merit even as a blazing conflagration
consumes a forest. Let happiness be thine, O king, as the result of the
gifts thou makest to those that solicit thee!' Saying these words unto
them, they left the spot, proceeding by another way. The flesh those
high-souled ones had intended to cook remained uncooked. Indeed,
abandoning that flesh, they went away, and entered the woods in search of
food. After this, the ministers of the king, urged by their master,
entered those woods and plucking certain figs endeavoured to give them
away unto those Rishis. The officers of the king filled some of those
figs with gold and mixing them with others sought to induce those
ascetics to accept them. Atri took up some of those figs, and finding
them heavy refused to take them. He said, 'We are not destitute of
knowledge. We are not fools! We know that there is gold within these
figs. We have our senses about us. Indeed, we are awake instead of being
asleep. If accepted in this world, those will produce bitter consequence
hereafter. He who seeks happiness both here and hereafter should never
accept these.'"

"Vasishtha said, 'If we accept even one gold coin, it will be counted as
a hundred or even a thousand (in assigning the demerit that attaches to
acceptance). If, therefore, we accept many coins, we shall surely attain
to an unhappy end hereafter!'"

Kasyapa said, 'All the paddy and barley on earth, all the gold and
animals and women that occur in the world, are incapable of gratifying
the desire of a single person. Hence, one possessed of wisdom should
dispelling cupidity, adopt tranquillity!'"

"Bharadwaja said, 'The horns of a Ruru, after their first appearance,
begin to grow with the growth of the animal. The cupidity of man is even
like this. It has no measure!'"

"Gautama said, 'All the objects that exist in the world are incapable of
gratifying even a single person. Man is even like the ocean, for he can
never be filled (even as the ocean can never be filled by all the waters
that are discharged into it by the rivers).'"

"Viswamitra said, 'When one desire cherished by a person becomes
gratified, there springs up immediately another whose gratification is
sought and which pierces him like a shaft.'"

"Jamadagni said, 'Abstention from accepting guts supports penances as
their foundation. Acceptance, however, destroys that wealth (viz., the
merit of penances).'"

"Arundhati said, 'Some people are of opinion that things of the world may
be stored with a view to spend them upon the acquisition of righteousness
(by gifts and sacrifices). I think, however, that the acquisition of
righteousness is better than that of worldly wealth.'"

"Ganda said, 'When these my lords, who are endued with great energy, are
so very much afraid of this which seems to be a great terror a weak man
as I am fear it the more.'"

"Pasusakha said, 'The wealth there is in righteousness is very superior.
There is nothing superior to it. That wealth is known to the Brahmans. I
wait upon them as their servant, only for learning to value that wealth.'"

"The Rishis (all together) said, 'Let happiness be his, as the result of
the gifts he makes, who is the king of the people of this land. Let his
gift be successful who has sent these fruits to us, enclosing gold within
them.'"

"Bhishma continued, 'Having said these words, those Rishis of steadfast
vows, abandoning the figs having gold within them, left that spot and
proceeded to whatever destination they liked.'"

"The ministers said, 'O king, coming to know of the existence of gold
within the figs, the Rishis have gone away! Let this be known to thee!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by his ministers, king Vrishadarbhi
became filled with wrath against all those Rishis. Indeed, to take
vengeance upon them, the monarch entered his own chamber. Observing the
austerest of penances, he poured on his sacred fire libations of ghee,
accompanying each with Mantras uttered by him. From that fire there then
arose as the result of the incantation, a form capable of striking every
one with fear. Vrishadarbhi named her as Yatudhani. That form which had
been from the incantations of the king, looking as terrible as the Last
Night, appeared with joined hands before the monarch. Addressing king
Vrishadarbhi, she said, 'What shall I accomplish?'"

"Vrishadarbhi said, 'Go and follow the seven Rishis, as also Arundhati,
and the husband of their maid-servant, and the maid-servant herself, and
comprehend what the meanings are of their names. Having ascertained their
names, do thou slay all of them. After slaying them thou mayst go
whatever destination thou likest.'"[419]

"Bhishma continued, 'Saying, 'So be it! the Rakshasi who had been named
Yatudhani, in her proper form, proceeded to that forest in which the
great Rishis wandered in search of food. Indeed, O king, those great
Rishis, with Atri among them, roved within the forest, subsisting upon
fruits and roots. In course of their wanderings they saw a mendicant of
broad shoulders, and plump arms and legs and well-nourished face and
abdomen. Of limbs that were all adipose, he was wandering with a dog in
his company. Beholding that mendicant whose limbs were all well-developed
and handsome, Arundhati exclaimed, addressing the Rishis, 'None of you
will ever be able to show such well-developed features!'"

"Vasishtha said, 'The sacred fire of this person is not like ours for
while he is able to pour libations on it, morning and evening, none of us
are able to do the same. It is for this reason that we see both him and
his dog so well-developed.''

"Atri said, 'This man does not, like us, feel the pangs of hunger. His
energy has not sustained, like ours, any diminution. Acquired with the
greatest difficulty, his Vedas have not, like ours, disappeared. Hence,
it is that we see both him and his dog so well-developed.'[420]

"Viswamitra said, 'This man is not, like us, unable to observe the
eternal duties inculcated in the scriptures. I have become idle. I feel
the pangs of hunger. I have lost the knowledge I had acquired. This man
is not like us in this respect. Hence I see both him and his dog so
well-developed.'"

''Jamadagni said, 'This man has not to think of storing his annual grain
and fuel as we are compelled to, do. Hence I see both him and his dog so
well-developed!'

"Kasyapa said, 'This man has not, like us, four brothers of the whole
blood who are begging from house to house, uttering the words,
'Give--Give!' Hence it is that I see him and his dog so well-developed.'

"Bharadwaja said, 'This man hath no regret like ours for having condemned
and cursed his spouse. He hath not acted so wickedly and senselessly.
Hence I see both him and his dog so well-developed!'

"Gautama said, 'This man bath not like us only three pieces of covering
made of Kusa grass, and a single Ranku-skin, each of which again, is
three years old. Hence it is that I see both him and his dog so
well-developed!'

"Bhishma continued, 'The wandering mendicant, beholding those great
Rishis, approach them, and accosted them all by touching their hand
according to the custom. Conversing then with each other about the
difficulty of obtaining sustenance in that forest and the consequent
necessity of bearing the pangs of hunger, all of them left that spot.
Indeed, they wandered through that wilderness, all bent upon a common
purpose, viz., the plucking of fruits and the extraction of roots for
sustenance. One day, as they were wandering they beheld a beautiful lake
overgrown with lotuses. Its banks were covered with trees that stood
thickly near one another. The waters of the lake were pure and
transparent. Indeed, the lotuses that adorned the lake were all of the
hue of the morning sun. The leaves that floated on the water were of the
colour of lapis lazuli. Diverse kinds of aquatic fowls were sporting on
its bosom. There was but one path leading to it. The banks were not miry
and the access to the water was easy. Urged by Vrishadarbhi, the Rakshasi
of frightful mien who had sprung from his incantations and who had been
named Yatudhani, guarded the lake. Those foremost of Rishis, with
Pasusakha in their company, proceeded towards the lake, which was thus
guarded by Yatudhani for the object of gathering some lotus stalks.[421]
Beholding Yatudhani, of frightful aspect standing on the banks of the
lake, those great Rishis addressed her, saying, 'Who art thou that thus
standest alone in these solitary woods? For whom dost thou wait here?
What, indeed, is thy purpose? What dost thou do here on the banks of this
lake adorned with lotuses?'"

"Yatudhani said, 'It matters not who I am. I deserve not to be questioned
(respecting my name and race and purposes). Ye that are possessed of
ascetic wealth, know that I am the guard set to watch this lake.'"

'The Rishis said, 'All of us are hungry. We have nothing else to eat.
With thy permission we would gather some lotus-stalks!'"

"Yatudhani said, 'Agreeably with a compact, do ye take the lotus-stalks
as ye please. Ye must, one by one, give me your names. Ye may then,
without delay, take the stalks!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'Ascertaining that her name was, Yatudhani and that
she stood there for slaying them (after knowing, from the meanings their
names, what the extent was of their power), Atri, who was famishing with
hunger, addressed her, and said these words.'"

"Atri said, 'I am called Atri because I cleanse the world from sin. For,
again, thrice studying the Vedas every day, I have made days of my
nights. That, again, is no night in which I have not studied the Vedas.
For these reasons also I am called Atri, O beautiful lady!'"

"Yatudhani said, 'O thou of great effulgence, the explanation thou hast
given me of thy name is incapable of being comprehended by me. Do thou,
therefore, go and plunge into this tank filled with lotuses!'"

"Vasishtha said, 'I am endued with the wealth (that consists of the Yoga
attributes of puissance, etc.) I lead, again, a domestic mode of life,
and am regarded as the foremost of all persons that lead such a mode of
life. In consequence of being endued with (such) wealth, of my living as
a householder, and of my being regarded as the foremost of all
householders, I am called Vasishtha.'

"Yatudhani said, 'The etymological explanation of thy name is perfectly
incomprehensible to me, in as much as the inflections which the original
roots have undergone are unintelligible. Rio and plunge into this lake of
lotuses!'"

"Kasyapa said, 'I always protect my body, and in consequence of my
penances I have become endued with effulgence. For thus protecting the
body and for this effulgence that is due to my penances, I have come to
be called by the name of Kasyapa!'

"Yatudhani said, 'O thou of great effulgence, the etymological
explanation thou hast given of thy name is incapable of being
comprehended by me. Go and plunge into this lake filled with lotuses!'

"Bharadwaja said, 'I always support my sons, my disciples, the deities,
the Brahmanas, and my wife. In consequence of thus supporting all with
ease, I am called Bharadwaja!'

"Yatudhani said, 'The etymological explanation thou hast given me of thy
name is perfectly incomprehensible to me, in consequence of the many
inflections the root has undergone. Go and plunge into this lake filled
with lotuses!'"

"Gotama said, 'I have conquered heaven and earth by the aid of
self-restraint. In consequence of my looking upon all creatures and
objects with an equal eye, I am like a smokeless fire. Hence I am
incapable of being subjugated by thee. When, again, I was born, the
effulgence of my body dispelled the surrounding darkness. For these
reasons I am called Gotama!'

"Yatudhani said, 'The explanation thou hast given me of thy name, O great
ascetic, is incapable of being understood by me. Go and plunge into this
lake of lotuses!'"

"Viswamitra said, 'The deities of the universe are my friends. I am also
the friend of the universe. Hence, O Yatudhani, know that I am called
Viswamitra!'

"Yatudhani said, 'The explanation thou hast given of thy name is
incomprehensible to me in consequence of the inflections the root has
undergone. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses!'"

"Jamadagni said, 'I have sprung from the sacrificial fire of the deities.
Hence am I called Jamadagni, O thou of beautiful features!'"

"Yatudhani said, 'The etymological explanation thou hast given me, O
great ascetic, of thy name, is incomprehensible to me (in consequence of
the diverse inflections the root has undergone) Do thou go and plunge
into this lake of lotuses!'"

"Arundhati said, 'I always stay by the side of my husband, and hold the
earth jointly with him. I always incline my husband's heart towards me. I
am, for these reasons called Arundhati!'

"Yatudhani said, The explanation thou hast given me of thy name is
perfectly incomprehensible to me in consequence of the inflections the
roots have undergone. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses!'

"Ganda said, 'The Ganda means a portion of the cheek. As I have that
portion a little elevated above the others, I am, O thou that hast sprung
from the sacrificial fire of Saivya, called by the name of Ganda!'"

"Yatudhani said, 'The explanation which thou hast given me of thy name is
perfectly incomprehensible to me in consequence of the inflections which
the root has undergone. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses!'"

"Pasusakha said, 'I protect and tend all animals that I see, and I am
always a friend to all animals. Hence am I called Pasusakha, O thou that
hast sprung from the (sacrificial) fire (of king Vrishadarbhi).'

"Yatudhani said, 'The explanation thou hast given me of thy name is
perfectly incomprehensible to me in consequence of the inflections which
the roots have undergone. Go and plunge into this lake of lotuses!'"

"Sunahsakha said,[422] 'I am incapable of explaining the etymology of my
name after the manner of these ascetics. But know, O Yatudhani, that I am
called by the name of Sunahsakha!'

"Yatudhani said, 'Thou hast mentioned thy name only once. The explanation
thou hast offered I have not able to catch. Do thou, therefore, mention
it again, O regenerate one!'"

"Sunahsakha said, 'Since thou hast been unable to catch my name in
consequence of my having mentioned it only once, I shall strike thee with
my triple stick! Struck with it, be thou consumed into ashes without
delay!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'Struck then, on the head, by the Sannyasin, with his
triple stick which resembled the chastisement inflicted by a Brahmana,
the Rakshasi who had sprung from the incantations of king. Vrishadarbhi
fell down on the earth and became reduced to ashes.[423] Having thus
destroyed the mighty Rakshasi, Sunahsakha thrust his stick into the earth
and sat himself down on a grassy plot of land. The Rishis then, having,
as they liked, plucked a number of lotuses and taken up a number of
lotus-stalks, came up from the lake, filled with joy. Throwing on the
ground the heap of lotuses which they had gathered with much toil, they
plunged once more into it for offering oblations of water to the Pitris.
Coming up, they proceeded to that part of the bank where they had
deposited the lotus-stalks. Reaching that spot, those foremost of men
found that the stalks were nowhere to be seen.'"

"The Rishis said, 'What sinful and hard-hearted man has stolen away the
lotus-stalks gathered by our hungry selves from desire of eating?'

"Bhishma continued, 'Those foremost of regenerate persons, suspecting one
another, O crusher of foes, said, 'We shall each have to swear to our
innocence! All those ascetics then, famishing with hunger and worn out
with exertion, agreeing to the proposal, took these oaths.'

"Atri said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalk touch kine with his
foot, make water facing the sun, and study the Vedas on excluded days!'"

"Vasishtha said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks abstain from
studying the Vedas, or leash hounds, or be a wandering mendicant
unrestrained by the ordinances laid down for that mode of life, or be a
slayer of persons that seek his protection, or live upon the proceeds of
the sale of his daughter, or solicit wealth from those that are low and
vile!'"

"Kasyapa, said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks utter all kinds
of words in all places, give false evidence in a court of law, eat the
flesh of animals not slain in sacrifices, make gifts to undeserving
persons or to deserving persons at unseasonable times, and have sexual
congress with women during daytime!'"

"Bharadwaja said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be cruel and
unrighteous in his conduct towards women and kinsmen and kine. Let him
humiliate Brahmanas, in disputations, by displaying his superior
knowledge and skill. Let him study the Riks and the Yajuses, disregarding
his preceptor! Let him pour libations upon fires made with dry grass or
straw!"[424]

"Jamadagni said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be guilty of
throwing filth and dirt on water. Let him be inspired with animosity
towards kine. Let him be guilty of having sexual congress with women at
times other than their season. Let him incur the aversion of all persons.
Let him derive his maintenance from the earnings of his wife! Let him
have no friends and let him have many foes! Let him be another's guest
for receiving in return those acts of hospitality which he has done to
that other![425]'"

"Gotama said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be guilty of
throwing away the Vedas after having studied them! Let him cast off the
three sacred fires! Let him be a seller of the Soma (plant or juice)! Let
him live with that Brahmana who resides in a village which has only one
well from which water is drawn by all classes and who has married a Sudra
woman!'"

"Viswamitra said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be fated to
see his preceptors and seniors and his servants maintained by others
during his own life-time. Let him not have a good end. Let him be the
father of many children! Let him be always impure and a wretch among
Brahmanas! Let him be proud of his possessions! Let him be a tiller of
the soil and let him be filled with malice! Let him wander in the season
of rains. Let him be a paid servant! Let him be the priest of the king!
Let him assist at the sacrifices of such impure persons as do not deserve
to be assisted at their sacrifices!'"

"Arundhati said, 'Let her who has stolen the lotus-stalks always
humiliate her mother-in-law! Let her be always vexed with her husband!
Let her eat whatever good things come to her house without sharing them
with others! Disregarding the kinsmen of her lord, let her live in her
husband's house and eat, at the day's close, the flour of fried barely!
Let her come to be regarded as unenjoyable (in consequence of the stains
that would tarnish her)! Let her be the mother of a heroic son![426]'"

"Ganda said, 'Let her who has stolen, the lotus-stalks be always a
speaker of falsehoods! Let her always quarrel with her kinsmen! Let her
bestow her daughter in marriage for a pecuniary consideration! Let her
eat the food which she has cooked, alone and without sharing it with
anybody! Let her pass her whole life in slavery! Indeed, let her who has
stolen the lotus-stalks be quick with child in consequence of sexual
congress under circumstances of guilt.'"

"Pasusakha said, 'Let him who has stolen the lotus-stalks be born of a
slave-mother. Let him have many children all of whom are worthless! And
let him never bow to the deities.'"

"Sunahsakha said, 'Let him who has removed the lotus-stalks obtain the
merit of bestowing his daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana, who has
studied all the Samans and the Yajuses and who has carefully observed the
vow of Brahmacharya, Let him perform the final ablutions after having
studied all the Atharvans!'"

"All the Rishis said, 'The oath thou hast taken is no oath at all, for
all the acts which thou hast mentioned are very desirable for the
Brahmanas! It is evident, O Sunahsakha, that thou hast appropriated our
lotus-stalks!'"

"Sunahsakha said, 'The lotus stalks deposited by you not being seen, what
you say is perfectly true, for it is I who have actually stolen them. In
the very sight of all of you I have caused the disappearance of those
stalks! Ye sinless ones, the act was done by me from desire of testing
you! I came hither for protecting you. That woman who lies slain there
was called Yatudhani. She was of a fierce disposition. Sprung from the
incantations of king Vrishadarbhi, she had come here from the desire of
slaying all of you! You ascetics endued with wealth of penances, egged on
by that king, she had come, but I have slain her. That wicked and sinful
creature, sprung from the sacrificial fire, would otherwise have taken
your lives. It was for killing her and saving you that I came here, ye
learned Brahmanas! Know that I am Vasava! Ye have completely freed
yourselves from the influence of cupidity. In consequence of this, ye
have won many eternal regions fraught with the fruition of every wish as
soon as it rises in the heart! Do ye rise, without delay, from this place
and repair to those regions of beatitude, ye regenerate ones, that are
reserved for you!'

"Bhishma continued, 'The great Rishis, highly gratified at this, replied
unto Purandara, saying, 'So be it!' They then ascended to heaven in
company of Indra himself. Even thus, those high-souled persons, though
famishing with hunger and though tempted at such a time with the offer of
diverse kinds of enjoyable articles, refrained from yielding to
temptation. As the result of such self-denial, they attained to heaven.
It seems, therefore, that one should, under all circumstances, cast off
cupidity from oneself. Even this, O king, is the highest duty. Cupidity
should be cast off. The man who recites this account (of the deeds of the
righteous Rishis) in assemblies of men, succeeds in acquiring wealth.
Such a man has never to attain to a distressful end. The Pitris, the
Rishis, and the deities become all pleased with him. Hereafter, again, he
becomes endued with fame and religious merit and wealth!'"



SECTION XCIV

"Bhishma said, "In this connection is cited the old history of the oaths
(taken by many Rishis one after another) on the occasion of a sojourn to
the sacred waters. O best of the Bharatas, the act of theft had been done
by Indra, and the oaths were taken by many royal and regenerate Rishis.
Once on a time, the Rishis, having assembled together, proceeded to the
western Prabhasa. They held a consultation there which resulted in a
resolve on their part to visit all the sacred waters on earth. There were
Sakra and Angiras and Kavi of great learning and Agastya and Narada and
Pravata; and Bhrigu and Vasishtha and Kasyapa and Gautama and Viswamitra
and Jamadagni, O king! There were also the Rishi Galava, and Ashtaka and
Bharadwaja and Arundhati and the Valakhilyas; and Sivi and Dilipa and
Nahusha and Amvarisha and the royal Yayati and Dhundhumara and Puru.
These foremost of men, placing the high-souled Satakratu, the slayer of
Vritra, at their head, went to all the sacred waters one after another,
and at last reached the highly sacred Kausiki on the day of the full moon
in the month of Magha. Having cleansed themselves of all sins by
ablutions performed in all the sacred waters, they at last proceeded to
the very sacred Brahmasara. Bathing in that lake, those Rishis endued
with energy like that of fire began to gather and eat the stalks of the
lotus. Amongst those Brahmanas, some had extracted the stalks of the
lotus and some the stalks of the Nymphoea stellata. Soon they found that
the stalks extracted by Agastya (and deposited on the bank) had been
taken away by somebody. The foremost of Rishis, Agastya, addressing them
all, said, 'Who has taken away the good stalks which I had extracted and
deposited here? I suspect some one amongst you must have done the act.
Let him who has taken them away give them back to me. It behoves you not
thus to misappropriate my stalks! It is heard that Time assails the
energy of Righteousness. That Time has come upon us. Hence, Righteousness
is afflicted. It is meet that I should go to heaven for good, before
unrighteousness assails the world and establishes itself here![427]
Before the time comes when Brahmanas, loudly uttering the fully Vedas,
within the precincts of villages and inhabited places, cause the Sudras
to hear them, before the time comes when kings often against the rules of
Righteousness from motives of policy, I shall go to heaven for good!
Before men cease to regard the distinctions between the lower, the
middle, and the higher classes, I shall go to heaven for good. Before
Ignorance assails the world and envelops all things in darkness, I shall
go to heaven for good.[428] Before the time comes when the strong begin
to lord it over the weak and treat them as slaves, I shall go to heaven
for good. Indeed, I dare not remain on earth for witnessing these
things.' The Rishis, much concerned at what he said, addressed that great
ascetic and said, 'We have not stolen thy stalks! Thou shouldst not
harbour these suspicions against us. O great Rishi, we shall take the
most frightful oaths!' Having said these words, conscious of their own
innocence, and desirous of upholding the cause of righteousness, those
Rishis and sages of royal descent then began to swear, one after another,
the following oaths.'"

"Bhrigu said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks censure when censured,
assail when assailed, and eat the flesh that is attached to the back-bone
of animals (slaughtered in sacrifice)!'"[429]

"Vasishtha said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks neglect his Vedic
studies, leash hounds, and having, taken himself to the mendicant order
live in a city or town!'[430]

"Kasyapa said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks sell all things in all
places, misappropriate deposits, and give false evidence!'

"Gautama said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks live, displaying pride
in all things, with an understanding that does not see all creatures with
an equal eye, and always yielding himself to the influence of desire and
wrath! Let him be a cultivator of the soil, and let him be inspired by
malice!'[431]

"Angiras said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be always impure! Let
him be a censurable Brahmana (for his misdeeds). Let him leash hounds.
Let him be guilty of Brahmanicide. Let him be averse to expiations after
having committed transgressions!'"

"Dhundhumara said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be ungrateful to
his friends! Let him take birth in a Sudra woman! Let him eat alone any
good food (coming to the house), without sharing it with others!'"[432]

"Dilipa said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks descend to those regions
of misery and infamy which are reserved for that Brahmana who re-sides in
a village having but one well and who has sexual congress with a Sudra
woman!'"[433]

"Puru said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks adopt the occupation of a
physician! Let him be supported by the earnings of his wife! Let him draw
his sustenance from his father-in-law!'"

"Sukra said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks eat the flesh of animals
not slain in sacrifices! Let him have sexual congress at day-time! Let
him be a servant of the king!'"

"Jamadagni said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks study the Vedas on
forbidden days or occasions. Let him feed friends at Sraddhas performed
by him! Let him eat at the Sraddha of a Sudra!'

"Sivi said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks die without having
established a fire (for daily worship)! Let him be guilty of obstructing
the performance of sacrifices by others! Let him quarrel with those that
are observant of penances!'"

"Yayati said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be guilty of having
sexual congress with his wife when she is not in her season and when he
is himself in the observance of a vow and bears matted locks on his head!
Let him also disregard the Vedas!'"

"Nahusha said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks live in domesticity
after having betaken himself to the vow of mendicancy! Let him act in
whatever way he pleases (and without restraint of any kind), after having
undergone the initiatory rites in view of a sacrifice or some solemn
observance! Let him take pecuniary gratification for prelections to
disciples (on any branch of knowledge that the latter come to learn)!'

"Amvarisha said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be cruel and
unrighteous in his behaviour towards women and kinsmen and kine! Let him
be guilty also of Brahmanicide!'"

"Narada said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be one that identifies
the body with the soul! Let him study the scriptures with a preceptor
that is censurable! Let him chant the Vedas, offending at each step
against the rules of orthoepy! Let him disregard all his seniors!'"

"Nabhaga said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks always speak
false-hoods and quarrel with those that are righteous! Let him bestow his
daughter in marriage after accepting a pecuniary gratification offered by
his son-in-law!'"

"Kavi said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks he guilty of striking a
cow with his foot. Let him make water, facing the sun! Let him cast off
the person that seeks shelter at his hands!'"

"Viswamitra said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks become a servant
that behaves with deceit towards his master! Let him be the priest of a
king! Let him be the Ritwik of one that should not be assisted at his
sacrifices!'"

"Parvata said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be the chief of a
village! Let him make journeys on asses! Let him leash hounds for a
living!'"

"Bharadwaja said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be guilty of all the
demerits that become his who is cruel in his behaviour and untruthful in
speech!'"

"Ashtaka said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be a king destitute of
wisdom capricious and sinful in his behaviour, and disposed to rule the
Earth unrighteously!'"

"Galava said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be more infamous than a
sinful man! Let him be sinful in his acts towards his kinsmen and
relatives! Let him proclaim the gifts he makes to others!'"

"Arundhati said, 'Let her who has stolen thy stalks speak ill of her
mother-in-law! Let her feel disgust for her lord. Let her eat alone any
good food that comes to her house!'"

"The Valakhilyas said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks stand on one
foot at the entrance of a village (for earning his subsistence)! Let him.
while knowing all duties, be guilty of every breach!'"[434]

"Sunahsakha said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be a Brahmana that
sleeps in happiness, having disregarded his daily Homa! Let him, after
becoming a religious mendicant, behave in whatever way he pleases,
without observing any restraint!'"

"Surabhi said, 'Let her who has stolen thy stalks be milked, with her
(hind) legs bound with a rope of human hair, and with the aid of a calf
not her own, and, while milked, let her milk be held in a vessel of white
brass!'[435]

"Bhishma continued, 'After the Rishis and the royal sages had sworn these
diverse oaths, O Kuru king, the thousand-eyed chief of the deities,
filled with joy, cast his looks on the angered Rishi Agastya. Addressing
the Rishi who was very angry at the disappearance of his lotus-stalks,
Maghavat thus declared what was passing in his mind. Hear, O king, what
the words were that Indra spoke in the midst of those regenerate and
celestial Rishis and royal sages.'"

"Sakra said, 'Let him who has stolen thy stalks be possessed of the merit
of him who bestows his daughter in marriage upon a Brahmana that has duly
observed the vow of Brahmacharya or that has duly studied the Samans and
the Yajuses! Let him also have the merit of one that undergoes the final
bath after completing one's study of the Atharva Veda! Let him who has
stolen thy stalks have the merit of having studied all the Vedas. Let him
be observant of all duties and righteous in his behaviour! Indeed, let
him go to the region of Brahman!'

"Agastya said, 'Thou hast, O slayer of Vala, uttered a benediction
instead of a curse! (It is evident), thou hast taken my stalks!" Give
them to me, for that is the eternal duty!'"

"Indra said, 'O holy one, I did not remove thy stalks, led by cupidity!
Indeed, I removed them from desire of hearing this conclave recite what
the duties are that we should observe. It behoveth thee not to give way
to anger! Duties are the foremost of Srutis. Duties constitute the
eternal path (for crossing the sea of the world)! I have listened to this
discourse of the Rishis (on duties) that is eternal and immutable, and
that transcends all change![436] Do thou then, O foremost of learned
Brahmanas, take back these stalks of thine! O holy one, it behoves thee
to forgive my transgression, O thou that art free from every fault!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by the chief of the deities, the
ascetic, viz., Agastya, who had been very angry, took back his stalks.
Endued with great intelligence, the Rishi became cheerful. After this,
those denizens of the woods proceeded to diverse other sacred waters.
Indeed, repairing to those sacred waters they performed their ablutions
everywhere. The man who reads this narrative with close attention on
every Parva day, will not have to become the progenitor of an ignorant
and wicked son. He will never be destitute of learning. No calamity will
ever touch him. He will, besides, be free from every kind of sorrow.
Decrepitude and decay will never be his. Freed from stains and evil of
every kind, and endued with merit, he is sure to attain to Heaven. He who
studies this Sastra observed by the Rishis, is sure, O prince of men, to
attain to the eternal region of Brahman that is full of felicity!'"[437]



SECTION XCV

"Yudhishthira said, 'O chief of Bharata's rare, by whom was the custom of
giving umbrellas and sandals at obsequial ceremonies introduced? Why was
it introduced and for what purpose are those gifts made? They are given
not only at obsequial ceremonies but also at other religious rites. They
are given on many occasions with a view to acquiring religious merit. I
wish to know, in detail, O regenerate one, the true meaning of this
custom!'"

"Bhishma said, 'Do thou, O prince, attentively listen to the details I
shall recite in respect of the custom of giving away umbrellas and shoes
at religious rites, and as to how and by whom it was introduced. I shall
also tell thee in full, O prince, how it acquired the force of a
permanent observance and how it came to be viewed as a meritorious act. I
shall, in this connection, recite the narrative of the discourse between
Jamadagni and the high-souled Surya. In ancient times, the illustrious
Jamadagni, O puissant king, of Bhrigu's race, was engaged in practising
with his bow. Taking his aim, he shot arrow after arrow. His wife Renuka
used to pick up the shafts when shot and repeatedly bring them back to
that descendant, endued with blazing energy, of Bhrigu's race. Pleased
with the whizzing noise of his arrows and the twang of his bow, he amused
himself thus by repeatedly discharging his arrows which Renuka brought
back into him. One day, at noontide, O monarch, in that month when the
sun was in Jyesthamula, the Brahmana, having discharged all his arrows,
said to Renuka, 'O large-eyed lady, go and fetch me the shafts I have
shot from my bow, O thou of beautiful eye-brows! I shall again shoot them
with my bow.' The lady proceeded on her errand but was compelled to sit
under the shade of a tree, in consequence of her head and feet being
scorched by the heat of the sun. The black-eyed and graceful Renuka,
having rested for only a moment, feared the curse of her husband and,
therefore, addressed herself again to the task of collecting and bringing
back the arrows. Taking them with her, the celebrated lady of graceful
features came back, distressed in mind and her feet smarting with pain.
Trembling with fear, she approached her husband. The Rishi, filled with
wrath, repeatedly addressed his fair-faced spouse, saying, 'O Renuka, why
hast thou teen so late in returning?'"

"Renuka said, 'O thou that art endued with wealth of penances, my head
and feet were scorched by the rays of the sun! Oppressed by the heat, I
had betaken myself to the shade of a tree! Just this has been the cause
of the delay! Informed of the cause, do thou, O lord, cease to be angry
with me!'"

"Jamadagni said, 'O Renuka, this very day shall I destroy, with the fiery
energy of my weapons, the star of day with his blazing rays, that has
afflicted thee in this way!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'Drawing his celestial bow, and taking up many
arrows, Jamadagni stood, turning his face towards the sun and watching
him as he moved (in his diurnal course). Then, O son of Kunti, beholding
him addressed for fight, Surya approached him in the guise of a Brahmana,
and said unto him. 'What has Surya done to displease thee? Coursing
through the firmament, he draws up the moisture from the earth, and in
the form of rains he pours it down once more on her. It is through this,
O regenerate one, that the food of human beings springs up,--food that is
so agreeable to them! The Vedas say that it is food that constitutes the
life-breaths. O Brahmana, hidden in the clouds and encompassed by his
rays, the sun drenches the seven islands with showers of rain. O puissant
one, the moisture, thus poured, diffusing itself into the leaves and
fruits of vegetables and herbs, is transformed into food. O son of
Bhrigu, the rites of nativity, religious observances of every kind,
investiture with the sacred thread, gifts of kine, weddings, all articles
in view of sacrifices, the rules for the governance of men, gifts, all
sorts of union (between man and man), and the acquisition of wealth, have
their origin in food! Thou knowest this well! All the good and agreeable
things in the universe, and all the efforts made by living creatures,
flow from food. I duly recite what is well-known to thee! Indeed, thou
fully knowest all that I have said! Do thou, therefore, O regenerate
Rishi, appease thy anger! What wilt thou gain by annihilating the sun?'"



SECTION XCVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'What did that foremost of ascetics, viz., Jamadagni
endued with great energy, do when thus besought by the maker of day?'"

"Bhishma said, 'O descendant of Kuru, despite all the supplications of
Surya, the sage Jamadagni, endued with the effulgence of fire, continued
to cherish his anger. Then. O king, Surya, in the guise of a Brahmana,
bowed his head unto him and addressed him, with folded hands, in these
soft words. 'O regenerate Rishi, the sun is always in motion! How shalt
thou pierce the Lord of day who is continually moving forward?'"

"Jamadagni said, With the eye of knowledge I know thee to be both moving
and motionless! I shall surely read thee a lesson this day. At midday
thou seemest to stay in the heavens for a moment. It is then, O Surya,
that I shall pierce thee with my arrows! There is no swerving from this
my resolution!'"

"Surya said 'O regenerate Rishi, without doubt, thou knowest me, O best
of archers! But, O holy one, though I have offended, behold, I am a
suppliant for thy protection!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'At this, the adorable Jamadagni smilingly addressed
the maker of day, saying, 'O Surya, when thou hast sought my protection,
thou hast nothing to fear! He would transcend the simplicity that exists
in Brahmanas, the stability that exists in the Earth, the mildness
existing in the Moon, the gravity existing in Varuna, the effulgence
existing in Agni, the brightness of Meru, and the heat of the sun, who
would slay a suppliant for protection! The man that can slay a suppliant
is capable of violating the bed of his preceptor, of slaying a Brahmana,
and of drinking alcohol. Do thou, therefore, think of some remedy for
this evil, by which people may be relieved when heated by the rays!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'So saying, that excellent descendant of Bhrigu
remained silent for a while, and Surya forthwith made over to him an
umbrella and a pair of sandals.'"

"Surya said, 'Do thou, O great Rishi, take this umbrella wherewith the
head may be protected and my rays warded off. This pair of sandals is
made of leather for the protection of the feet. From this day forth the
gift of these articles in all religious rites shall be established as an
inflexible usage!'"

"Bhishma continued, 'This custom of giving umbrellas and shoes was
introduced by Surya! O descendant of Bharata, these gifts are considered
meritorious in the three worlds. Do thou, therefore, give away umbrellas
and shoes to Brahmanas. I have no doubt that thou shalt then acquire
great religious merit by the act. O foremost one of Bharata's race, he
who gives away a white umbrella with a hundred ribs to a Brahmana,
attains to eternal felicity after death and resides in the region of
Indra, respected by Brahmanas, Apsaras, and Devas. O puissant one, he who
gives shoes to Snataka Brahmanas as also to Brahmanas practising the
rites of religion whose feet have become sore with the heat of the sun,
attains to regions coveted by the very deities. Such a man, O Bharata,
dwells in happiness in the highest Heaven after his death. O foremost one
of Bharata's race, I have thus recited to thee in full, the merits of
giving away shoes and umbrellas at religious ceremonies!'"



SECTION XCVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O foremost one of Bharata's race, do thou relate to
me all the duties of the household mode and tell me all that a man should
do in order to attain to prosperity in this world.'

"Bhishma said, 'O Bharata, I shall, in this connection, recite to thee
the old story of Vasudeva and the goddess Earth, The puissant Vasudeva. O
excellent prince of Bharata's race, after hymning the praises of the
goddess Earth, questioned her about this very topic that thou hast
enquired about.'

"Vasudeva said, 'Having adopted the state of a householder, what acts
should I, or one like me, perform and how are such acts to fructify in
good?'"

"The goddess Earth said, 'O Madhava, the Rishis, the deities, the Pitris,
and men should be worshipped, and sacrifices should be performed, by a
householder. Do thou also learn this from me that the deities are always
pleased with sacrifices, and men are gratified with hospitality.
Therefore, the householder should gratify them with such objects as they
desire. By such acts, O slayer of Madhu, the Rishis also are gratified.
The householder, abstaining from food, should daily attend to his sacred
fire and to his sacrificial offerings. The deities, O slayer of Madhu,
are gratified with such acts. The householder should daily offer
oblations of food and water, or of fruits, roots and water, for the
gratification of the Pitris, and the Vaiswadeva offering should be
performed with rice boiled, and oblations of clarified butter unto Agni,
Soma, and Dhanwantari. He should offer separate and distinct oblations
unto Prajapati. He should make sacrificial offerings in due order; to
Yama in the Southern region, to Varuna in Western region, to Soma in the
Northern region, to Prajapati within the homestead, to Dhanwantari in the
North-eastern region, and to Indra in the Eastern region. He should offer
food to men at the entrance of his house. These, O Madhava, are known as
the Vali offerings. The Vali should be offered to the Maruts and the
deities in the interior of one's house. To the Viswedevas it should be
offered in open air, and to the Rakshasas and spirits the offerings
should be made at night. After making these offerings, the householder
should make offerings unto Brahmanas, and if no Brahmana be present, the
first portion of the food should be thrown into the fire. When a man
desires to offer Sraddha to his ancestors, he should, when the Sraddha
ceremony is concluded, gratify his ancestors and then make the Vali
offerings in due order. He should then make offerings unto the
Viswedevas. He should next invite Brahmanas and then properly regale
guests arrived at his house, with food. By this act, O prince, are guests
gratified. He who does not stay in the house long, or, having come, goes
away after a short time, is called a guest. To his preceptor, to his
father, to his friend and to a guest, a householder should say, 'I have
got this in my house to offer thee today!' And he should offer it
accordingly every day. The householder should do whatever they would ask
him to do. This is the established usage. The householder, O Krishna,
should take his food last of all after having offered food to all of
them. The householder should worship, with offerings of Madhuparka his
king, his priest, his preceptor, and his father-in-law as also Snataka
Brahmanas even if they were to stay in his house for a whole year. In the
morning as well as in the evening, food should be offered on the ground
to dogs, Swapachas,[438] and birds. This is called the Vaiswadeva
offering. The householder, who performs these ceremonies with a mind
unclouded by passion, obtains the blessings of the Rishis in this world,
and after death attains to the heavenly regions.'"

"Bhishma continued, "The puissant Vasudeva, having listened to all this
from the goddess Earth, acted accordingly. Do thou also act in the same
way. By performing these duties of a householder, O king, thou shalt
acquire fame in this world and attain to heaven after death!'"



SECTION XCVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Of what kind is the gift of light, O chief of
Bharata's race? How did this gift originate? What are the merits that
attach to it? Do thou tell me all this.'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection, O Bharata, is recited the old
narrative of the discourse between Manu, that lord of creatures, and
Suvarna. There was in days of yore an ascetic, O Bharata, of the name of
Suvarna. His complexion was like that of gold and hence he was called
Suvarna (the gold-complexioned), Endued with a pure lineage, good
behaviour, and excellent accomplishments, he had mastered all the Vedas.
Indeed, by the accomplishments he possessed, he succeeded in surpassing
many persons of high lineage. One day that learned Brahmana saw Manu, the
lord of all creatures, and approached him. Meeting with each other, they
made the usual enquiries of politeness. Both of them were firm in the
observance of truth. They sat down on the delightful breast of Meru, gnat
mountain of gold. Seated there they began to converse with each other on
diverse subjects connected with the high-souled deities and regenerate
Rishis and Daityas of ancient times. Then Suvarna, addressing the
Self-born Menu, said these words, 'It behoveth thee to answer one
question of mine for the benefit of all creatures. O lord of all
creatures, the deities are seen to be worshipped with presents of flowers
and other good scents. What is this? How has this practice been
originated? What also are the merits that attach to it? Do thou discourse
to me on this topic.'"

"Manu said, 'In this connection is recited the old history of the
discourse between Sukra and the high-souled (Daitya) Vali. Once on a
time, Sukra of Bhrigu's race approached the presence of Vali, the son of
Virochana, while he was ruling the three worlds. The chief of the Asuras,
that giver of sacrificial presents in abundance, having worshipped the
descendant of Bhrigu with the Arghya (and offering him a seat), sat down
after his guest had seated himself. This very topic that thou hast
started relating to the merits attaching to the gift of flowers and
incense and lamps, came up on the occasion. Indeed, the chief of the
Daityas put this high question to Sukra, that most learned of all
ascetics.'

"Vali said, 'O foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma, what,
indeed, is the merit of giving flowers and incense and lamps? It behoveth
thee, O foremost of Brahmanas, to discourse to me on this.'

"Sukra said, 'Penance first sprang into life. Afterwards came Dharma (or
compassion and other virtues). In the interval between started into life
many creepers and herbs.[439] Innumerable were the species of those. All
of them have (the deity) Soma for their lord. Some of these creepers and
herbs came to be regarded as Amrita and some came to be regarded as
Poison. Others that were neither this nor that formed one class. That is
Amrita which gives immediate gratification and joy to the mind. That is
Poison which tortures the mind exceedingly by its odour. Know again that
Amrita is highly auspicious and that Poison is highly inauspicious. All
the (deciduous) herbs are Amrita. Poison is born of the energy of fire.
Flowers gladden the mind and confer prosperity. Hence, men of righteous
deeds bestowed the name Sumanas on them. That man who is in a state of
purity offers flowers into the deities finds that the deities become
gratified with him, and as the consequence of such gratification bestow
prosperity upon him. O ruler of the Daityas, those deities unto whom
worshippers offer flowers, O lord, uttering their names the while, become
gratified with the offers in consequence of their devotion. The
(deciduous) herbs are of diverse kinds and possess diverse kinds of
energy. They should be classed as fierce, mild, and powerful. Listen to
me as I tell thee which trees are useful for purposes of sacrifice and
which are not so. Hear also what garlands are acceptable to Asuras, and
what are beneficial when offered to the deities. I shall also set forth
in their due order what garlands are agreeable to the Rakshasas, what to
the Uragas, what to the Yakshas, what to human beings, and what to the
Pitris, in proper order. Flowers are of diverse kinds. Some are wild,
some are from trees that grew in the midst of human habitations; some
belong to trees that never grow unless planted on well-tilled soil; some
are from trees growing on mountains; some are from trees that are not
prickly; and some from trees that are prickly. Fragrance, beauty of form,
and taste also may offer grounds of classification. The scent that
flowers yield is of two kinds, agreeable and disagreeable. Those flowers
that emit agreeable scent should be offered to the deities. The flowers
of trees that are destitute of thorns are generally white in hue. Such
flowers are always acceptable to the deities, O lord! One possessed of
wisdom should offer garlands of aquatic flowers, such as the lotus and
the like, unto the Gandharvas and Nagas and Yakshas. Such plants and
herbs as produce red flowers, as are possessed of keen scent, and as are
prickly, have been laid down in the Atharvana as fit for all acts of
incantation for injuring foes. Such flowers as are possessed of keen
energy, as are painful to the touch, as grow on trees and plants having
thorns, and as are either bloody-red or black, should be offered to
(evil) spirits and unearthly beings. Such flowers as gladden the mind and
heart, as are very agreeable when pressed, and as are of beautiful form,
have been said, O lord, to be worthy of being offered to human beings.
Such flowers as grow on cemeteries and crematoria, or in places dedicated
to the deities, should not be brought and used for marriage and other
rites having growth and prosperity for their object, or for acts of
dalliance and pleasure in secrecy. Such flowers as are born on mountains
and in vales, and as are agreeable in scent and aspect, should be offered
unto the deities. Sprinkling them with sandal-paste, such agreeable
flowers should be duly offered according to the ordinances of the
scriptures. The deities become gratified with the scent of flowers; the
Yakshas and Rakshasas with their sight, the Nagas with their touch; and
human beings with all three, viz., scent, sight, and touch. Flowers, when
offered to the deities gratify them immediately. They are capable of
accomplishing every object by merely wishing its accomplishment. As such,
when gratified with devotees offering them flowers, they cause all the
objects cherished by their worshippers to be immediately accomplished.
Gratified, they gratify their worshippers. Honoured, they cause their
worshippers to enjoy all honours. Disregarded and insulted, they cause
those vilest of men to be ruined and consumed. I shall, after this, speak
to thee of the merits that attach to the ordinances about the gift of
incense. Know, O prince of Asuras, that incenses are of diverse kinds.
Some of them are auspicious and some in-auspicious. Some incenses consist
of exudations. Some are made of fragrant wood set on fire. And some are
artificial, being made by the hand, of diverse articles mixed together.
Their scent is of two kinds, viz., agreeable and disagreeable. Listen to
me as I discourse on the subject in detail.[440] All exudations except
that of the Boswellia serrata are agreeable to the deities. It is,
however, certain that the best of all exudations is that of the
Balsamodendron Mukul. Of all Dhupas of the Sari class, the Aquilaria
Agallocha is the best. It is very agreeable to the Yakshas, the
Rakshasas, and Nagas. The exudation of the Boswellia serrata, and others
of the same class, are much desired by the Daityas. Dhupas made of the
exudation of the Shorea robusta and the Pinus deodara, mixed with various
spirits of strong scent, are, O king, ordained for human beings. Such
Dhupas are said to immediately gratify the deities, the Danavas, and
spirits. Besides these, there are many other kinds of Dhupas used by men
of purposes of pleasure or enjoyment. All the merits that have been
spoken of as attaching to the offer of flowers should be known equally to
attach to the gift of such Dhupas as are productive of gratification. I
shall now speak of the merits that attach to the gift of lights, and who
may give them at what time and in what manner, and what should be the
kind of lights that should be offered. Light is said to be energy and
fame and has an upward motion. Hence the gift of light, which is energy,
enhances the energy of men[441]. There is a hell of the name of
Andhatamas. The period also of the sun's southward course is regarded as
dark. For escaping that hell and the darkness of this period, one should
give lights during the period when the sun is in his northward course.
Such an act is applauded by the good.[442] Since, again, light has an
upward course and is regarded as a remedy for darkness, therefore, one
should be a giver of light. Even this is the conclusion of the
scriptures. It is owing to the lights offered that the deities have
become endued with beauty, energy, and resplendence. By abstention from
such an act, the Rakshasas have become, endued with the opposite
attributes. Hence, one should always give lights. By giving lights a man
becomes endued with keen vision and resplendence One that gives lights
should not be an object of jealousy with others. Lights, again, should
not be stolen, nor extinguished when given by others. One that steals a
light becomes blind. Such a man has to grope through darkness (in the
next world) and becomes destitute of resplendence. One that gives lights
shines in beauty in the celestial regions like a row of lights. Among
lights, the best are those in which ghee is burnt. Next in order are
those in which the juice of (the fruits yielded by) deciduous herbs is
burnt. One desirous of advancement and growth should never burn (for
light) fat or marrow or the juice that flows from the bones of
creatures.[443] The man who desires his own advancement and prosperity
should always give lights at descents from mountains, in roads through
forests and inaccessible regions, under sacred trees standing in the
midst of human habitations, and in crossings of streets. The man who
gives lights always illumines his race, attains to purity of soul and
effulgence of form. Verily, such a man, after death, attains to the
companionship of the luminous bodies in the firmament. I shall now
discourse to thee upon the merits, with the fruits they bring about, that
attach to Vali offerings made to the deities, the Yakshas, the Uragas,
human beings, spirits, and Rakshasas. Those unscrupulous and wicked men
that eat without first serving Brahmanas and deities and guests and
children, should be known as Rakshasas. Hence, one should first offer the
food one has got ready unto the deities after having worshipped them duly
with restrained senses and concentrated attention. One should offer the
Vali unto the deities, bending one head in reverence. The deities are
always supported by food that householders offer. Verily, they bless such
houses in which offerings are made to them. The Yakshas and Rakshasas and
Pannagas, as also guests and all homeless persons, are supported by the
food that are offered by persons leading the domestic mode of life,
Indeed, the deities and the Pitris derive their sustenance from such
offerings. Gratified with such offerings they gratify the offerer in
return with longevity and fame and wealth. Clean food, of agreeable scent
and appearance, mixed with milk and curds, should, along with flowers, be
offered to the deities. The Valis that should be offered to Yakshas and
Rakshasas should be rich with blood and meat, with wines and spirits
accompanying, and adorned with coatings of fried paddy.[444] Valis mixed
with lotuses and Utpalas are very agreeable to the Nagas. Sesame seeds,
boiled in raw sugar, should be offered to the spirits and other unearthly
Beings. He who never takes any food without first serving therefrom the
Brahmanas and deities and guests, becomes entitled to first portions of
food. Such a man becomes endued with strength and energy. Hence, one
should never take any food without first offering a portion thereof to
the deities after worshipping them with reverence. One's house always
blazes forth with beauty in consequence of the household deities that
live in it. Hence, he that desires his own advancement and prosperity
should worship the household deities by offering them the first portion
of every food. Even thus did the learned Kavi of Bhrigu's race discourse
to Vali, the chief of the Asuras. That discourse was next recited by Manu
unto the Rishi Suvarna, Suvarna, in his turn, recited it to Narada. The
celestial Rishi Narada recited unto me the merits that attach to the
several acts mentioned. Informed of those merits, do thou, O son, perform
the several acts mentioned!'"



SECTION XCIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have, O chief of the Bharatas, heard what the
merits are that are won by presenters of flowers and incense and lights.
I have heard thee speak also of the merits that attach to a due
observance of the ordinances in respect of the presentation of the Vali.
It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to discourse unto me once more on this
subject. Indeed, tell me, O sire, once more of the merits of presenting
incense and lights. Why are Valis offered on the ground by persons
leading the domestic mode of life?'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is recited the old narrative of the
discourse between Nahusha and Agastya and Bhrigu. The royal sage Nahusha,
O monarch, possessed of wealth of penances, acquired the sovereignty of
Heaven by his own good deeds. With restrained senses, O king, he dwelt in
Heaven, engaged in doing diverse acts of both human and celestial nature.
From that high-souled monarch flowed diverse kinds of human acts and
diverse kinds of celestial acts also, O chief of men. The diverse rites
with respect to the sacrificial fire, the collection of sacred fuel and
of Kusa grass, as also of flowers, and the presentation of Vali
consisting of food adorned with fried paddy (reduced to powder), and the
offer of incense and of light,--all these, O monarch, occurred daily in
the abode of that high-souled king while he dwelt in heaven. Indeed,
though dwelling in heaven, he performed the sacrifice of Japa (or silent
recitation) and the sacrifice of meditation. And, O chastiser of foes,
Nahusha, although he had become the chief of the deities, yet worshipped
all the deities, as he used to do in days of yore, with due rites and
ceremonies. Some time after, Nahusha realised his position as the chief
of all the deities. This filled him with pride. From that time all his
acts (of the kind spoken of) were suspended. Filled with arrogance in
consequence of the boon he had received from all the deities, Nahusha
caused the very Rishis to bear him on their shoulders. In consequence,
however, of his abstention from all religious acts, his energy began to
sustain a diminution. The time was very long for which Nahusha filled
with pride, continued to employ the foremost of Rishis, possessed of
wealth of penances, as the bearers of his vehicles. He caused the Rishis
to discharge by turns his humiliating work. The day came when it was
Agastya's turn to bear the vehicles, O Bharata. At that time, Bhrigu,
that foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma, repaired to the
presence of Agastya while the latter was seated in his asylum, and
addressing him, said, 'O great ascetic, why should we patiently put up
with such indignity inflicted on us by this wicked-souled Nahusha who has
become the chief of the deities?'

"Agastya said, 'How can I succeed in cursing Nahusha, O great Rishi? It
is known to thee how the boon-giving (Brahman) himself has given Nahusha
the best of boons! Coming to heaven, the boon that Nahusha solicited was
that whoever would come within the range of his vision would, deprived of
all energy, come within his sway. The self-born Brahman granted him even
this boon, and it is for that reason that neither thyself nor I have been
able to consume him. Without doubt, is for this reason that none else
amongst the foremost of Rishis has been able to consume or hurl him down
from his high position, Formerly, O Lord, nectar was given by Brahman to
Nahusha for quaffing. For that reason also we have become powerless
against him. The supreme deity, it seems, gave that boon to Nahusha for
plunging all creatures into grief. That wretch among men behaves most
unrighteously towards the Brahmanas. O foremost of all speakers, do thou
tell us what should be done in view of the situation. Without doubt, I
shall do what thou wilt advise.'

"Bhrigu said, 'It is at the command of the Grandsire that I have come to
thee with the view of counteracting the puissance of Nahusha who is
possessed of great energy but who has been stupefied by fate. That
exceedingly wicked-souled wight who has become the chief of the deities
will today yoke thee to his car. With the aid of my energy I shall today
hurl him down from his position as Indra in consequence of his having
transcended all restraints! I shall today, in thy very sight,
re-establish the true Indra in his position--him, viz., who has performed
a hundred horse-sacrifices,--having hurled the wicked-souled and sinful
Nahusha from that seat! That unrighteous chief of the deities will today
insult thee by a kick, in consequence of his understanding being
afflicted by fate and for bringing about his own downfall. Incensed at
such an insult I shall today curse that sinful wretch, that enemy of the
Brahmanas, that has transcended all restraints, saying, 'Be thou
transformed into a snake!' In the very sight, O great ascetic, I shall
today hurl down on the earth the wicked-souled Nahusha who shall be
deprived of all energy in consequence of the cries of 'Fie' that will be
uttered from all sides.[445] Verily, I shall hurl down Nahusha today,
that wight of unrighteous deeds, who has, besides, been stupefied by
lordship and power. I shall do this, if it be acceptable to thee, O
ascetic! Thus addressed by Bhrigu, Mitravaruna's son Agastya of unfading
puissance and glory, became highly gratified and freed from every
anxiety.'"



SECTION C

"Yudhishthira said, 'How was Nahusha plunged into distress? How was he
hurled down on the earth? How, indeed, was he deprived of the sovereignty
of the gods? It behoveth thee to recite everything to me.'

"Bhishma said, 'Even thus did those two Rishis, viz., Bhrigu and Agastya,
converse with each other. I have already told thee how Nahusha, when he
first became the chief of the gods, acted in a becoming way. Verily, all
acts of human and celestial nature flowed from that high souled royal
sage! The offering of light, and all other rites of a similar kind, the
due presentation of Valis, and all rites as are performed on especially
sacred days,--all these were properly observed by the high-souled Nahusha
who had become the sovereign of the deities.[446] Pious acts are always
observed by those that are possessed of wisdom, in both the world of men
and that of the deities. Verily, O foremost of kings, if such acts are
observed, householders always succeed in acquiring prosperity and
advancement. Even such is the effect of the gift of lamps and of incense,
as also of bows and prostrations, to the deities. When food is cooked,
the first portion thereof should be offered to a Brahmana. The particular
offerings called Vali should also be presented to the household deities.
The deities become gratified with such gifts.[447] It is also well-known
that the measure of gratification which the deities derive from such
offerings is a hundred times as great as that which the householder
himself derives from making them. Persons endued with piety and wisdom
make offerings of incense and lights, accompanying them with bows and
prostrations. Such acts are always fraught with advancement and
prosperity to those that do them. Those rites which the learned go
through in course of their ablutions, and with the aid of waters,
accompanied with bows unto the gods, always contribute to the
gratification of the gods. When worshipped with proper rites, the highly
blessed Pitris, Rishis possessed of wealth of asceticism, and the
household deities, all become gratified. Filled with such ideas, Nahusha,
that great king, when he obtained the sovereignty of the deities,
observed all these rites and duties fraught with great glory. Some time
after the good fortune of Nahusha waned, and as the consequence thereof,
he disregarded all these observances and began to act in defiance of all
restraints in the manner I have already adverted to. The chief of the
deities, in consequence of his abstention from observing the ordinances
about the offers of incense and light, began to decline in energy. His
sacrificial rites and presents were obstructed by Rakshasas. It was at
this time that Nahusha yoked that foremost of Rishis, viz., Agastya, to
his car. Endued with great strength, Nahusha, smiling the while, set that
great Rishi quickly to the task, commanding him to bear the vehicle from
the banks of the Saraswati (to the place he would indicate). At this
time, Bhrigu, endued with great energy, addressed the son of Mitravaruna,
saying, 'Do thou close thy eyes till I enter into the matted locks on thy
head.' Having said this, Bhrigu of unfading glory and mighty energy
entered into the matted locks of Agastya who stood still like a wooden
post for hurling king Nahusha from the throne of Heaven. Soon after
Nahusha saw Agastya approach him for bearing his vehicle. Beholding the
lord of the deities Agastya addressed him, saying, 'Do thou yoke me to
thy vehicle without delay. To what region shall I bear thee? O lord of
the deities, I shall bear thee to the spot which thou mayst be pleased to
direct.' Thus addressed by him, Nahusha caused the ascetic to be yoked to
his vehicle. Bhrigu, who was staying within the matted locks of Agastya,
became highly pleased at this act of Nahusha. He took care not to cast
his eyes upon Nahusha. Fully acquainted with the energy which the
illustrious Nahusha had acquired in consequence of the boon which Brahman
had granted him, Bhrigu conducted himself in this way. Agastya also,
though treated by Nahusha in this way, did not give way to wrath. Then, O
Bharata, king Nahusha urged Agastya on with, his goad. The
righteous-souled Rishi did not still give way to anger. The lord of the
deities, himself giving way to anger, then struck Agastya on the head
with his left foot. When the Rishi was thus struck on the head, Bhrigu,
who was staying within Agastya's matted locks, became incensed and cursed
Nahusha of sinful soul, saying, 'Since thou hast struck with thy foot on
the head of this great Rishi, do thou, therefore, fall down on the earth,
transformed into a snake, O wretch of wicked understanding!' Thus cursed
by Bhrigu who had not been seen. Nahusha immediately became transformed
into a snake and fell down on the earth, O chief of Bharata's race! If O
monarch, Nahusha had seen Bhrigu, the latter would not then have
succeeded, by his energy, in hurling the former down on the earth. In
consequence of the various gifts that Nahusha had made, as also his
penances and religious observances though hurled down on the earth, O
king, he succeeded in retaining his memory. He then began to propitiate
Bhrigu with a view to the working out of the course. Agastya also, filled
with compassion, joined Nahusha in pacifying Bhrigu for bringing about an
end of the course. At last Bhrigu felt compassion for Nahusha and
provided' for the working out of the course.'

'Bhrigu said, 'There will appear a king (on earth) of the name of
Yudhishthira, the foremost of his race. He will rescue thee from this
curse.' Having said this, the Rishi vanished in the very sight of
Nahusha. Agastya also, of mighty energy, having thus accomplished the
business of the true Indra, that performer of a hundred sacrifices,
returned to his own asylum, worshipped by all members of the regenerate
order. Thou hast, O king, rescued Nahusha from Bhrigu's curse. Verily,
rescued by thee, he ascended to the region of Brahman in thy sight. As
regards Bhrigu, having hurled Nahusha on the earth, he went to the region
of Brahman and informed the Grandsire of it. The Grandsire, having called
Indra back, addressed the deities, saying. 'Ye deities, through the boon
I had granted him, Nahusha had obtained the sovereignty of heaven.
Deprived, however, of that sovereignty by the enraged Agastya, he has
been hurled on the earth. Ye deities, ye will not succeed in living
without a chief. Do ye, therefore, once more install Indra in the
sovereignty of Heaven.' Unto the Grandsire, O son of Pritha, who said so
unto them, the deities filled with joy, replied, saying, 'So be it!' The
divine Brahman then, O best of monarchs, installed Indra in the
sovereignty of heaven. Made once more the chief' of the deities, Vasava
began to shine in beauty and resplendence. Even this is what occurred in
days of yore through the transgression of Nahusha. In consequence,
however, of the merits he had acquired through acts of the kind I have
mentioned Nahusha succeeded in once more regaining his lost position.
Hence, when evening comes, persons leading the domestic mode of life
should give lights. The giver of lights is sure to acquire celestial
sight after death. Verily, givers of light become as resplendent as the
full moon. The giver of lights becomes endued with beauty of form and
strength for as many years as correspond with the number of twinkles for
which the lights given by him burn or blaze.'"[448]



SECTION CI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Where do those foolish, wretched, and sinful men go,
O chief of men, that steal or misappropriate such articles as belong to
Brahmanas?'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall, in this connection, O Bharata, recite to thee
the old narrative of a conversation between a Chandala and a low
Kshatriya.'[449]

"The person of the royal order said, 'Thou seemest, O Chandala, to be old
in years, but thy conduct seems to be like that of a boy! Thy body is
besmeared with the dust raised by dogs and asses, but without minding
that dust thou art anxious about the little drops of vine milk that have
fallen upon thy body! It is plain that such acts as are censured by the
pious are ordained for the Chandala. Why, indeed, dost thou seek to wash
off the spots of milk from thy body?'[450]

"The Chandala said, 'Formerly, O king, certain kine belonging to Brahmana
were stolen. While they were being carried away, some milk from their
udders fell upon a number of Soma plants that grew by the roadside. Those
Brahmanas that drank the juice of the plants thus bedewed with milk, as
also the king who performed the sacrifice in which that Soma was drunk,
had to sink in hell. Indeed, for having thus appropriated some thing that
had belonged to a Brahmana, the king with all the Brahmanas that had
assisted him had to go to hell. All those men also, Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas, that drank milk or ghee or curds, in the palace of the king
who had stolen the Brahmana's kine, had to fall into hell. The stolen
kine also, shaking their bodies, slew with their milk the sons and
grandsons of those that had stolen them, as also the king and the queen
although the latter treated the animals with great care and attention. As
regards myself, O king, I used to live in the observance of the vow of
Brahmacharya in that place where these kine were placed after they had
been stolen away. The food I had obtained by begging became sprinkled
over with the milk of those kine. Having taken that food, O thou of the
royal order, I have, in this life, become a Chandala. The king who had
stolen the kine belonging to a Brahmana obtained an infamous end. Hence,
one should never steal or appropriate anything that belongs to a
Brahmana. Behold to what state I am reduced in consequence of my having
eaten food that had been sprinkled over with milk belonging to a
Brahmana! It is for this reason that Soma plants become unsaleable by a
person possessed of wisdom. They who sell the Soma plant are censured by
the wise. Indeed, O son, they who purchase Soma and they who sell it,
both sink in the hell called Raurava when, departing from this world,
they repair to the region of Yama. That man who, possessing a knowledge
of the Vedas, duly sells Soma, becomes in his next life a usurer and
quickly meets with destruction. For three hundred times he has to sink
into hell and become transformed into an animal that subsists upon human
ordure. Serving a person that is vile and low, pride, and rape upon a
friend's wife, if weighed against one another in a balance, would show
that pride, which transcends all restraints, is the heaviest. Behold this
dog, so sinful and disagreeably pale and lean! (He was a human being in
his former life). It is through pride that living creatures attain to
such a miserable end. As regards myself, I was born in a large family, in
a former birth of mine. O lord, and I was a thorough master of all
branches of knowledge and all the sciences. I knew the gravity of all
these faults, but influenced by pride, I became blinded and ate the meat
attached to the vertebral columns of animals. In consequence of such
conduct and such food, I have come to this state. Behold the reverses
brought about by Time! Like a person whose cloth has taken fire at one
end, or who is pursued by bees, behold, I am running, penetrated with
fear, and smeared with dust! They that lead the domestic mode of life are
rescued from all sins by a study of the Vedas, as also by gifts of other
kinds, as declared by the wise.[451] O thou of the royal order, a
Brahmana that is sinful in conduct, becomes rescued from all his sins by
the study of the Vedas if he betakes himself to the forest mode of life
and abstains from attachment of every kind. O chief of Kshatriyas, I am
in this life, born in a sinful older! I fail to see clearly how I may
succeed in cleansing myself from all sins. In consequence of some
meritorious act of a former life, I have not lost the memory of my
previous lives. O king, I throw myself on the mercy! I ask thee! Do thou
resolve my doubt. By what auspicious course of conduct should I wish to
achieve my emancipation? O foremost of men, by what means shall I succeed
in getting rid of my status as a Chandala?'

"The person of the royal order said, 'Know, O Chandala, the means by
which thou mayst be able to attain to emancipation. By casting off thy
life-breaths for the sake of a Brahmana thou mayst attain a desirable
end! By throwing thy body on the fire of battle as a libation to the
beasts and birds of prey for the sake of a Brahmana, indeed, by casting
off thy life-breaths thus, thou mayst achieve emancipation! By no other
means wilt thou succeed in achieving it!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, that Chandala, O scorcher of foes,
poured his life-breaths as a libation on the fire of battle for the sake
of protecting a Brahmana's wealth and as the consequence of that act
attained to a very desirable end. Hence, O son, thou shouldst always
protect the property of the Brahmanas, if, O chief of Bharata's race,
thou desirest, O thou of mighty arms, an end that is eternal felicity!'"



SECTION CII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, it has been said that all pious men
attain to the same region after death. Is it true, O Bharata, that there
is difference of position or status among them?'

"Bhishma said, 'By different deeds, O son of Pritha, men attain to
different regions. They who are righteous in conduct attain to regions of
felicity, while they who are sinful attain to regions that are fraught
with misery. In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
discourse, O son, between the ascetic Gautama and Vasava. A certain
Brahmana of the name of Gautama, mild and self-restrained and with all
his senses under complete control, beheld an infant elephant that had
lost his mother and that was exceedingly cheerless on that account. Full
of compassion and steady in the observance of his vows, the ascetic
nursed that infant animal. After a long time the little beast grew up
into a large and mighty elephant. One day, Indra, assuming the form of
king Dhritarashtra, seized that mighty elephant which was as huge as a
hill and from whose rent temples the juice was trickling down. Beholding
the elephant dragged away, the great ascetic Gautama of rigid vows
addressed king Dhritarashtra and said, 'O ungrateful Dhritarashtra, do
not rob me of this elephant. It is looked upon by me as a son and I have
reared it with much pain. It is said that between the righteous,
friendship springs up if only they exchange seven words.[452] Thou
shouldst see, O king, that the sin of injuring a friend does not touch
thee! It behoveth thee not, O king, to take away by force this elephant
that brings me my fuel and water, that protects my asylum when I am away,
that exceedingly docile and obedient to his instructor, that is mindful
of doing all the offices that his preceptor commands, that is mild and
well-broken, and that is grateful and very dear to me! Indeed, thou
shouldst not bear it away, disregarding my protestations and cries!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'I shall give thee a thousand kine, a hundred
maid-servants, and five hundred pieces of gold. I shall also, O great
Rishi, give thee diverse other kinds of wealth. What use can Brahmanas
have with elephants?'

"Gautama said, Keep, O king, thy kine and maid-servants and coins of gold
and various gems and diverse other kinds of wealth! What, O monarch, have
Brahmanas to do with wealth?'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Brahmana, have no use for elephants. Verily, O
learned Brahmana, elephants are meant for persons of the royal order. In
taking away an animal, viz., this foremost of elephants, for my use as
vehicle, I cannot be regarded as committing any sin. Do thou cease
obstructing me in this way, O Gautama!'

"Gautama said, 'O illustrious king, repairing even to that region of Yama
where the righteous live in joy and the sinful in grief, I shall take
from thee this my elephant!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'They that are destitute of (religious) acts, they
that have no faith and are atheists, they that are of sinful souls and
are always engaged in gratifying their senses, only they have to go to
the region of Yama and endure the misery he inflicts. Dhritarashtra shall
go to a higher region, and not thither!'

"Gautama said, 'The region of Yama is such that men are there controlled.
No untruth can be told there. Only truth prevails in that place. There
the weak persecute the strong. Repairing. thither I shall force thee to
yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Only those persons, that intoxicated with pride,
conduct themselves towards their eldest sister and father and mother as
towards foes, have to repair, O great ascetic, to such a region. I shall
repair to a higher region. Indeed, Dhritarashtra shall not have to go
thither!'

"Gautama said, 'The region, called Mandakini, of king Vaisravana is
attained by those highly blessed persons for whom are every joy and
comfort. There Gandharvas and Yakshas and Apsaras live (gladdening all
the denizens with enchanting dances and music). Repairing even thither, O
king, I shall force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Those persons who regard hospitality to guests as a
vow, who are observant of good vows (having other objects), who give
shelter to Brahmanas, and who eat what remains after distribution among
all those that are dependent upon them, adorn the region called Mandakini
of Kuvera. (I shall not go thither, for a higher region is reserved for
me)!'

"Gautama said, 'If thou repairest to those delightful woods decked with
flowers, that stand on the summit of Meru, that echo with melodious voice
of Kinnaris, and that are graced with beautiful Jamvus of wide-spreading
branches, I shall proceed even thither and force thee to yield up this
elephant to me!'

'Dhritarashtra said, 'Those Brahmanas that are endued with mild
dispositions, that are devoted to truth, that are possessed of great
learning in the scriptures, that are compassionate unto all creatures,
that study the Puranas with all the histories, that pour libations on the
sacred fire and make gifts of honey unto the Brahmanas, repair to such
regions, O great Rishi! I shall repair to a region that is higher. Indeed
Dhritarashtra shall not go thither. If thou art acquainted with any other
well-known region of felicity, speak unto me, for I shall repair even
thither!'

"Gautama said, 'If thou proceedest to the woods owned by Narada and held
dear by him, that are adorned with flowers and that echo with the
melodious songs of the prince of Kinnaras, and that are the eternal abode
of Gandharvas and Apsaras, I shall follow thee thither and force thee to
yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'They who never solicit alms, they who cultivate
music and dancing, and always rove about in joy, proceed to such regions.
O great Rishi, I shall repair to a region that is higher. Indeed,
Dhritarashtra shall not have to go thither!'

"Gautama said, 'If thou goest to that region where the Uttara-Kurus blaze
in beauty and pass their days in gladness, O king, in the company of the
very deities, where those beings that have their origin in fire, those
that have their origin in water, and those having their origin in
mountains, reside in happiness, and where Sakra raineth down the fruition
of every wish, and where women live in perfect freedom, unrestrained by
rules of any kind regulating their conduct of motions, and where there is
no feeling of jealousy between the sexes,--if thou repairest thither,
even thither shall I proceed and force thee to yield up this elephant to
me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Those men that are freed from desire with respect
to all articles of enjoyment, that abstain from meat, that never take up
the rod of chastisement, and never inflict the least harm on mobile and
immobile creatures, that have constituted themselves the soul of all
creatures, that are entirely freed from the idea of meum, that have cast
off attachments of every kind, that regard gain and loss as also praise
and blame as equal,--only those men, O great Rishi, repair to such
regions. I shall repair to a higher region. Verily, Dhritarashtra shall
not go thither!'

"Gautama said, 'Next to these blaze in beauty those eternal regions,
redolent with excellent perfumes, that are free from passions of every
kind and that are destitute of sorrow. These constitute the abode of the
high-souled king Soma. If thou repairest thither, even thither shall I
proceed and force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Those men that always make gifts without receiving
any gift, who never accept any service from others, who own nothing which
they cannot give to a deserving person, who are hospitable to all
creatures, who are inclined to show grace to every one, who are endued
with forgiving dispositions, who never speak ill of others, who protect
all creatures by throwing over them the shroud of compassion, and who are
always righteous in their behaviour,--only those men, O great Rishi,
proceed to such regions. I shall proceed to a higher region. Verily,
Dhritarashtra shall not go there!'

"Gautama said, 'Next to these blaze in beauty other regions that are
eternal, free from passion and darkness and sorrow, and that lie at the
foot of the high-souled deity of the Sun. If thou repairest thither, even
thither shall I go and force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Those men that are attentive to the study of the
Vedas, that are devoted to the service of their preceptors, that are
observant of penances and excellent vows, that are firm in truth, that
never utter anything that smacks of disobedience or enmity to their
preceptors, that are always alert, and ever ready in service of seniors
and preceptors,--they repair, O great Rishi, to such regions, they that
are pure (of mind and body), that are endued with cleansed souls, that
are of restrained speech, that are firm in truth, and that are
well-versed in the Vedas. I shall proceed to a higher region! Verily,
Dhritarashtra shall not go thither!'

"Gautama said, 'Next to those are the eternal regions that blaze in
beauty, that are redolent with excellent perfumes, that are free from
passion, and that are free from every sorrow. They constitute the abode
of the high-souled king Varuna. If thou proceedest thither, even thither
shall I go and force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Those men who worship the deities by observing the
vow called Chaturmasya, that perform a hundred and ten sacrifices, that
pour libations every day on their sacred fire with devotion and faith for
three years agreeably with the ordinances declared in the Vedas, that
bear without flinching the burden of all duties, that walk steadily along
the way trod by the righteous, that steadily sustain the course of
conduct followed by the righteous-souled,--only they repair to such
regions. I shall repair to a higher region. Verily, Dhritarashtra shall
not go thither!'

"Gautama said, 'Above them are the regions of Indra, free from passion
and sorrow, that are difficult of access and coveted by all men.
Proceeding even to the abode of Indra himself of mighty energy, I shall,
O king, force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'He who lives for a hundred years, who is endued
with heroism, who studies the Vedas, and who performs sacrifices with
devotion, verity, such men proceed to the region of Sakra. I shall repair
to a higher region. Verily, Dhritarashtra shall not go there!'

"Gautama said, 'Above the Heavens are the regions of the Prajapatis of
superior felicity abounding in every happiness, and divested of sorrow.
Belonging to those puissant ones from whom the creation has sprung, they
are coveted by all persons. If thou repairest thither, even thither shall
I go and force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'Those kings that have bathed upon the completion of
the Rajasuya sacrifice, that are endued with righteous souls, that have
protected their subjects properly, and that have washed their limbs with
sanctified water upon the completion of the horse-sacrifice, repair to
such regions. Verily, Dhritarashtra shall not go there!'

"Gautama said, 'Next to those, blaze in beauty those eternal regions,
redolent with delicious perfumes, free from passion, and transcending all
sorrow. Those are the regions of kine difficult of attainment where
oppression can never be. If thou repairest thither, I shall proceed even
thither and force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'He who, owning thousand kine, gives away a hundred
kine every year, or owning a hundred kine gives away ten every year to
the best of his might, or owning only ten or even five kine gives away
therefrom one cow, and they who attain to a mature old age practising the
vows of Brahmacharya all their days, who obey the declarations of the
Vedas, and who, endued with energy of mind, betake themselves to
pilgrimages to sacred waters and shrines, dwell in felicity in the region
of kine. They who repair to Prabhasa and Manasa, the lakes of Pushkara,
the large lake called Mahatsara, the sacred woods of Naimisha, Vahuda,
Karatoya, Ganga, Gayasiras, Vipasa, Sthulavaluka, Krishna, the five
rivers (of the Punjab), the extensive lake called Mahahrada, Gomati,
Kausiki, Champa, Saraswati, Drisadwati, and Yamuna,--indeed, those
illustrious Brahmanas, steady in the observance of vows, who go to these
sacred waters,--repair to the regions of which thou speakest. Endued with
celestial bodies and adorned with celestial garlands those blessed
individuals, always emitting the most delightful perfumes, repair to
those regions of joy and gladness. Verily, Dhritarashtra shall not go
there!'

"Gautama said, 'Next to these are regions where there is no fear of the
least cold or heat, no hunger, no thirst, no pain, no sorrow, no joy, no
one that is agreeable or disagreeable, on friend, and on enemy: where
decrepitude and death are not, and where there is neither righteousness
nor sin. Proceeding even to that region which is freed from passion,
which abounds with equable happiness, and where there is wisdom and the:
tribute of Sattwa,--verily, proceeding to even that sacred abode of the
self-born Brahman,--I shall force thee to yield up this elephant to me!'

"Dhritarashtra said, 'They who are freed from all attachments, who are
possessed of cleansed souls, who are steady in the observance of the
foremost vows, who are devoted to the Yoga that depends on tranquillising
the mind, and who have (in this life) attained to the happiness of
heaven,--those persons wedded to the attribute of Sattwa--attain to the
sacred region of Brahman. O great ascetic, thou shalt not be able to
discover Dhritarashtra there!'

"Gautama said, 'There where the foremost of Rathantaras is sung, where
altars are strewn with the sacred Kusa blades, for the performance of
Pundarika sacrifices, there where Soma-drinking Brahmanas go on vehicles
drawn by excellent steeds,[453] proceeding even thither I shall force
thee to yield up this elephant. I think, thou art the slayer of Vritra,
viz., the deity that has performed a hundred sacrifices, engaged in
roving through all the regions of the universe! I hope, I have not,
through mental weakness (not recognising thee before) committed any fault
by the words I have addressed thee!'

"The deity of a hundred sacrifices said, 'Yes, I am Maghavat. I came to
the world of human beings, for seizing this elephant. I bow to thee. Do
thou command me! I shall readily accomplish all that thou mayst be
pleased to say!'

"Gautama said, 'Do thou give me, O chief of the deities, this elephant
that is of white complexion and that is so young, for it is only ten
years of age. I have brought it up as a child of my own. Dwelling in
these woods, it has grown under my eye and has been to me a dear
companion. Do thou set free this my child that thou hast seized and
wishest to drag away!'

"The deity of a hundred sacrifices said, 'This elephant that has been a
son to thee, O foremost of Brahmanas, cometh to thee looking wishfully at
thee! Behold, it sniffs thy feet with its nostrils! My salutations to
thee! Do thou pray for my welfare!'

"Gautama said, 'O chief of the deities, I do always think of thy good! I
always offer thee worship! Do thou also, O Sakra, bestow thy blessings on
me! Given by thee, I accept this elephant!'

"The deity of a hundred sacrifices said, 'Amongst all those high-souled
and foremost of Rishis that firmly adhere to truth and that have the
Vedas planted in their heart, thou alone hast been able to recognise me.
For this reason I am exceedingly pleased with thee! Do thou, therefore, O
Brahmana, come with me quickly, accompanied by this thy son! Thou
deservest to attain to diverse regions of great felicity without the
delay of even a single day!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Having said these words, the wielder of the
thunderbolt, taking Gautama with him and placing him before, along with
his son, viz., that elephant, proceeded to heaven, that is difficult of
attainment by even the righteous. He who would listen to this history
every day or would recite it, restraining his senses the while,
proceedeth (after death) to the region of Brahman even as Gautama
himself.'"



SECTION CIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast discoursed to us on diverse kinds of gift,
on tranquillity of soul, on Truth, on compassion, on contentment with
one's wedded wife, and the merits of gift. It is known to thee, O
grandsire, that there is nothing whose puissance is superior to that of
penances. It behoveth thee to expound to us what constitutes the highest
penances.'

"Bhishma said, 'I tell thee, O Yudhishthira, that one attains to a region
of felicity that corresponds with the kind of penances that one observes.
This is what I hold, O son of Kunti, that there is no penance that is
superior to abstention from food! In this connection is recited the
ancient narrative of the discourse between Bhagiratha and the illustrious
Brahman (the Grandsire of the Creation). It has been heard by us, O
Bharata, that Bhagiratha attained to that region which transcends that of
the deities, of kine, and of the Rishis. Beholding this, O monarch, the
Grandsire Brahman, addressing Bhagiratha, said, 'How, O Bhagiratha, hast
thou attained to this region that is so difficult of attainment? Neither
the deities, nor Gandharvas, nor human beings, O Bhagiratha succeed in
coming here without having practised the severest austerities. How,
indeed, hast thou attained to this region?'

"Bhagiratha said, 'I used to make gifts of hundreds of thousands of gold
coin unto the Brahmanas, observing the Brahmacharya vow all the while, it
is not through the merit on those gifts, O learned one, that I have
attained to this region. I performed the Ekaratra sacrifice for ten
times, and the Pancharatra sacrifice for as many times. The Ekadasaratra
sacrifice was performed by me eleven times. The great sacrifice of
Jyotishtoma was performed by me a hundred times. It is not, however,
through the merits of those sacrifices that I have attained to this
region of felicity.[454] For a hundred years I lived continuously by the
side of the holy Jahnavi, all the while practising the severest
austerities. There I made gifts unto the Brahmanas of thousands of male
and female slaves. By the side of the Pushkara lakes I made gifts unto
the Brahmanas, for a hundred thousand times, a hundred thousand steeds,
and two hundred thousand kine. I also gave away a thousand damsels of
great beauty, each adorned with golden moons, and sixty thousand more
decked with ornaments of pure gold. It is not, however, through the
merits of those acts that I have succeeded in attaining to these
regions.[455] O lord of the universe, performing those sacrifices known
by the name of Gosava, I gave away ten Arvudas of kine, presenting each
Brahmana with ten kine, each of whom was accompanied with her calf, each
of whom yielded milk at the time, and with each of whom were given a
vessel of gold and one of white brass for milking her. Performing many
Soma sacrifices, I gave away unto each Brahmana ten kine each of whom
yielded milk, and each of whom had brought forth only her first calf,
besides making presents unto them of hundreds of kine belonging to that
species which is known by the name of Rohini. I also gave away unto the
Brahmanas twice ten Prayutas of other kine, all yielding milk. It is not
through the merit of those gifts, O Brahman, that I have succeeded in
attaining to this region of felicity. I also gave away a hundred thousand
horses of the Valhika breed, all white of complexion, and adorned with
garlands of gold. It is not, however, through the merits of those acts
that I have attained to this region. I gave away eight crores of golden
coins unto the Brahmanas, O Brahman, and then another ten crores also, in
each sacrifice that I performed. It is not, however, through the merits
of those acts that I have attained to this region of felicity. I also
gave away ten and then seven crores of steeds, O Grandsire, each of green
complexion, each having ears that were dark, and each adorned with
garlands of gold. I also gave away ten and seven thousand elephants of
huge size, of teeth as large as plough-shares, each having those whorls
on its body which are called Padmas, and each adorned with garlands of
gold. I gave away ten thousand cars, O Grandsire, whose limbs were made
of gold, and which were adorned with diverse ornaments of gold. I also
gave away seven thousand other cars with steeds yoked unto each. All the
steeds that were yoked unto them were adorned with ornaments of gold.
Those cars represented the Dakshinas of a sacrifice and were of exactly
that kind which is indicated in the Vedas. In the ten great Vajapeya
sacrifices that I performed, I gave away a thousand horses each endued
with the puissance of Indra himself, judged by their prowess and the
sacrifices they had performed. Spending a vast sum of money, O Grandsire,
and performing eight Rajasuya sacrifices, I gave away (unto the Brahmanas
that officiated in them) a thousand kings whose necks were adorned with
garlands of gold, after having vanquished them in battle. It is not,
however, through the merits of those acts that I have attained to this
region. In those sacrifices, O Lord of the universe, the presents that
flowed from me were as copious as the stream of Ganga herself. Unto each
Brahmana I gave two thousand elephants decked with gold, as many steeds
adorned with golden ornaments, and a hundred villages of the best kind.
Verily, I gave these unto each Brahmana for three times in succession.
Observant of penances, subsisting on regulated diet, adopting
tranquillity of soul, and restraining speech, I dwelt for a long time on
the breast of Himavat by the side of that Ganga whose irresistible
current (as it fell from heaven) was borne by Mahadeva on his head. It is
not through the merit of these acts, O Grand sire, that I have attained
to this region. Throwing the Sami, I adored the gods in myriads of such
sacrifices as are completed in course of a single day, and such others as
take twelve days for completing, and others still as can be completed in
three and ten days, besides many Pundarikas. I have not attained to this
region through the merits of any of those sacrifices.[456] I gave unto
the Brahmanas eight thousand white-complexioned bulls, each graced with a
beautiful hump, and each having one of its horns covered with gold. Unto
them I also gave beautiful wives whose necks were adorned with chains of
gold. I also gave away large heaps of gold and wealth of other kinds.
Verily, I gave away hills of gems and precious stones. Villages,
numbering by thousands and teeming with wealth and corn, were also given
away by me. With all my senses about me, I gave away unto the Brahmanas a
hundred thousand kine each of whom had brought forth only her first calf,
at many great sacrifices which I performed. It is not, however, through
the merits of those acts that I have attained to this region. I adored
the deities in a sacrifice that is completed in eleven days. Twice I
adored them in sacrifices that are completed in twelve days. I adored
them also many a time in the horse-sacrifices. Six and ten times I
performed the Arkayana sacrifice. It is not through the merits of those
acts that I have attained to this region. I also gave unto each Brahmana
a forest of Kanchana trees extending for a Yojana on every side, and with
each tree adorned with jewels and gems. It is not through the merits of
that act that I have attained to this region. For thirty years, with
heart perfectly freed from wrath, I observed the Turayana vow that is
possessed of very superior merit, and gave away unto the Brahmanas every
day nine hundred kine. Indeed, O Lord of the universe, every one of those
kine belonged to the Rohini species, and yielded milk at the time I gave
them away. It is not through the merits of those acts, O chief of the
deities, that I have attained to this region. I worshipped thirty fires,
O Brahmana, every day. I adored the deities in eight sacrifices in which
the fat of all animals was poured on the fire. I adored them in seven
sacrifices in which the fat of human beings was poured on the fire. I
adored them in a thousand and twenty-eight Viswajit sacrifices. It is not
through the merits of those sacrifices O Lord of all the deities, that I
have attained to this region. On the banks of Sarayu and Vahuda and Ganga
as also in the woods of Naimisha, I gave away millions of kine unto the
Brahmanas. It is not through the merits of those acts that I have
attained to this region. The vow of fast had been known to Indra. He had,
however, kept it a secret. Sukra, the descendant of Bhrigu, obtained a
knowledge of it by means of spiritual sight acquired through penances.
Blazing with energy as he does, it is Usanas who first made it known to
the universe. I observed that vow, O boon giving Deity! When I
accomplished that very superior vow, the Brahmana became all gratified
with me. A thousand Rishis came thither. All those Brahmanas and Rishis,
O puissant lord, gratified with me, said, 'Do thou repair to the region
of Brahmana! It is in consequence of the merits of that vow that I have
succeeded in attaining to this region of very superior felicity. There is
no doubt in this. Asked by the Supreme Ordainer of all things, I have
duly expounded the merits of the vow of fast. In my opinion, there is no
penance higher than fast. I vow to thee, O foremost of all the deities!
Be thou propitious unto me!'

"Bhishma continued, 'King Bhagiratha, who had said so and who deserved
every honour was on the conclusion of his speech, honoured by Brahman
according to the rites ordained for that purpose. Do thou, therefore, O
Yudhishthira, observe the vow of fast and worship the Brahmanas every
day. The words uttered by Brahmanas can accomplish everything both here
and hereafter. Indeed, the Brahmanas should ever be gratified with gifts
of robes food and white complexioned kine and good dwelling houses and
mansions. The very deities should gratify the Brahmanas. Freeing thyself
from cupidity, do thou practise this vow of very superior merit that is
not known to all!'"



SECTION CIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Man, it is said, is endued with a period of life
extending for a hundred years, and with energy and might that are
considerable. Why then, O grandsire, do human beings die even when they
are very young? By what does a man become endued with longevity, and by
what is his life shortened? Through what does a man acquire the fame that
rests upon great achievements? Through what does one attain to wealth and
prosperity? Is it by penances, or Brahmacharya, or silent recitation of
sacred Mantras, or drugs? Is it by his acts, or speech? Do thou explain
to me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall tell thee what thou askest me. In fact, I shall
tell thee what the reason is for which one becomes shortlived, and what
the reason is for which one becomes endued with longevity. I shall also
explain to thee the reason for which one succeeds in acquiring the fame
that rests on great achievements, and the reason for which one succeeds
in acquiring wealth and prosperity. Indeed, I shall enlighten thee as to
the manner in which one must live in order to be endued with all that is
beneficial for him. It is by conduct that one acquires longevity, and it
is by conduct that one acquires wealth and prosperity. Indeed, it is by
conduct that one acquires the fame that rests upon great achievements
both here and hereafter. The man whose conduct is improper or wicked
never acquires a long life. All creatures become afraid of such a man and
are oppressed by him. If, therefore, one wishes one's own advancement and
prosperity, one should, in this world, betake to conduct that is proper
and good. Good conduct succeeds in dispelling the inauspiciousness and
misery of even one that is sinful.[457] Righteousness has conduct for its
indication. They that are good and righteous are so in consequence of the
conduct they follow. The indications, again, of good conduct are afforded
by the acts of those that are good or righteous. People esteem that man
who acts righteously and who does good acts even if they only hear of him
without actually seeing him. They that are atheists, they that are
destitute of all acts, they that are disobedient to preceptors and
transgress the injunctions of the scriptures, they that are unacquainted
with and, therefore, unobservant of duties, and they that are wicked of
conduct, become shortlived. They that are of improper behaviour, they
that transgress all restraints, they that are unscrupulous in respect of
sexual congress, become shortlived here and have to go to Hell hereafter.
Even those men live for a hundred years who, though destitute of all
accomplishments, betake themselves to propriety and righteousness of
conduct and become endued with faith and freed from malice. He that is
free from wrath, that is truthful in speech, that never does any injury
to any creature in the universe, that is divested of malice and
crookedness and insincerity, succeeds in living for a hundred years. He
who always breaks little clods of earth, or tears up the grass that grows
under his feet, or cuts off his nails with his teeth, or is always
impure, or very restless, never succeeds in acquiring a long life.[458]
One should wake up from sleep at the hour known as the Brahma Muhurta and
then think of both religion and profit. Getting up from bed, one should
then wash one's face and mouth, and joining one's hands in an attitude of
reverence, say the morning prayers.[459] In this way, one should when
evening comes, say one's evening prayers also, restraining speech (with
other people) the while. One should never look at the rising sun, nor at
the setting sun.[460] Nor should one look at the sun when he is in
eclipse; nor at his image in the water; nor at midday when he is at the
meridian. The Rishis, in consequence of their adoring the two twilights
with great regularity succeeded in attaining to longevity. Hence, one
should, restraining speech, say one's prayers regularly at the two
twilights. As regards those Brahmanas that do not say their prayers at
the two twilights, a righteous king should set them to accomplish such
acts as are ordained for the Sudras. Persons of every order should never
have sexual congress with other people's wives. There is nothing that
shortens life so effectually as sexual congress with other people's
wives. For as many thousand years shall the adulterer have to live in
Hell as the number of pores on the bodies of the women with whom he may
commit the offence. One should dress one's hair, apply collyrium to one's
eyes, and wash one's teeth, as also worship the deities, in the forenoon.
One should not gaze at urine or faeces, or tread on it or touch it with
one's feet. One should not set out on a journey at early dawn, or at
midday, or in the evening twilight, or with a companion that is unknown,
or with a Sudra, or alone. While going along a road, one should, standing
aside, always make way to a Brahmana, to kine, to kings, to an old man,
to one that is weighted with a burden, to a woman quick with child, or to
one that is weak. When one meets a large tree that is known, one should
walk round it. One should also, when coming upon a spot where four roads
meet, walk round it before pursuing one's journey. At midday, or at
midnight, or at night in general, or at the two twilights, one should not
proceed to spots where four roads meet. One should never wear sandals or
clothes that have been worn by another. One should always observe the vow
of Brahmacharya, and should never cross one's legs. One should observe
the vow of Brahmacharya on the day of the new moon, as also on that of
the full moon, as also on the eighth lunar day of both fortnights. One
should never eat the flesh of animals not slain in sacrifice. One should
never eat the flesh of the back of an animal. One should avoid censuring
and calumniating others, as also all kinds of deceitful behaviour.[461]
One should never pierce others with wordy shafts. Indeed, one should
never utter any cruel speech. One should never accept a gift from a
person that is low and vulgar. One should never jitter such words as
trouble other people or as are inauspicious or are as' sinful. Wordy
shafts fall from the mouth. Pierced therewith, the victim grieves day and
night. The man of wisdom should never shot them for piercing the vitals
of other people. A forest, pierced with shafts or cut down with the axe,
grows again. The man, however, that is pierced with words unwisely
spoken, becomes the victim of wounds that fester and lead to death.[462]
Barbed arrows and Nalikas and broadheaded shafts are capable of being
extracted from the body. Wordy shafts, however, are incapable of being
extracted, for they lie embedded in the very heart. One should not taunt
a person that is defective of a limb or that has a limb in excess, or one
that is destitute of learning, or one that is miserable, or one that is
ugly or poor, or one that is destitute of strength. One should avoid
atheism, calumniating the Vedas, censuring the deities, malice, pride,
arrogance, and harshness. One should not, in wrath, take up the rod of
chastisement for laying it upon another. Only the son or the pupil, it
has been said, can be mildly chastised for purposes of instruction. One
should not speak ill of Brahmanas; nor should he point at the stars with
one's fingers. If asked, one should not say what the lunation is on a
particular day. By telling it, one's life becomes shortened. Having
answered calls of nature or having walked over a road, one should wash
one's feet. One should also wash one's feet before sitting to recite the
Vedas or to eat any food. These are the three things which are regarded
as pure and sacred by the deities and as such fit for the Brahmana's use,
viz., that whose impurity is unknown, that which has been washed in
water, and that which has been well-spoken of. Samyava, Krisara, meat,
Sashakuli and Payasa should never be cooked for one's own self. Whenever
cooked, these should be offered to the deities.[463] One should attend
every day to one's fire. One should every day give alms. One should,
restraining speech the while, clean one's teeth with the tooth-stick. One
should never be in bed when the sun is up. If one fails any day to be up
with the sun, one should then perform an expiation. Rising from bed, one
should first salute one's parents, and preceptors, or other seniors
deserving of respect. By so doing one attains to long life. The
tooth-stick should be cast off when done with, and a new one should be
used every day. One should eat only such food as is not forbidden in the
scriptures, abstaining from food of every kind on days of the new moon
and the full moon. One should, with senses restrained, answer calls of
nature, facing the north. One should not worship the deities without
having first washed one's teeth, Without also worshipping the deities
first, one should never repair to any person save one's preceptor or one
that is old in years or one that is righteous or one that is possessed of
wisdom. They that are wise should never see themselves in an unpolished
or dirty mirror. One should never have sexual congress with a woman that
is unknown or with one that is quick with child. One should never sleep
with head turned towards the north or the west. One should not lie down
upon a bed-stead that is broken or rickety. One should not sleep on a bed
without having examined it first with the aid of a light. Nor should one
sleep on a bed with another (such as wife) by one's side. One should
never sleep in a transverse direction. One should never make a compact
with atheists or do anything in conjunction with them.[464] One should
never drag a seat with the foot and sit on it. One should never bathe in
a state of nudity, nor at night. One possessed of intelligence should
never suffer one's limbs to be rubbed or pressed after bathing. One
should never smear unguents upon one's body without having first taken
bath. Having bathed, one should never wave one's cloth in the air (for
drying it). One should not always wear wet clothes. One should never take
off one's body the garlands of flowers one may wear. Nor should one wear
such garlands over one's outer garments. One should never even talk with
a woman during the period of her functional change. One should not answer
a call of nature on a field (where crops are grown) or at a place too
near an inhabited village. One should never answer a call of nature on a
water. One should first wash one's mouth thrice with water before eating
any food. Having finished one's meals, one should wash one's mouth thrice
with water and twice again. One should eat, with face turned eastwards,
one's food, restraining speech the while and without censuring the food
that is eaten. One should always leave a remnant of the food that is
placed before one for eating. Having finished one's meals, one should
mentally touch fire. If one eats with face turned eastwards, one becomes
endued with longevity. By eating with face turned southwards, one
acquires great fame. By eating with face turned westwards, one acquires
great wealth. By eating with face turned northwards, one becomes truthful
in speech. Having finished one's meals one should wash all the upper
holes of one's body with water.[465] Similarly, all the limbs, the navel,
and the palms of the hands should be washed with water. One should never
seat oneself upon husk of corn, or upon hair, or upon ashes, or upon
bones. One should, on no account, use the water that has been used by
another for bathing. One should always perform the Homa for propitiating
the deities, and recite the Savitri Mantra. One should always eat in a
seated posture. One should never eat while walking. One should never
answer a call of nature in a standing posture. One should never answer a
call of nature on ashes or in a cow-pen. One should wash one's feet
before sitting to one's meals. One should never sit or lie down for sleep
with wet feet. One who sits to one's meals after having washed one's
feet, lives for a hundred years. One should never touch these three
things of great energy, while one is in an impure state, viz., fire, a
cow, and a Brahmana. By observing this rule, one acquires longevity. One
should not, while one is in an impure state, cast one's eyes on these
three things of great energy, viz., the sun, the moon, and the stars. The
life-breaths of a young man go upwards when an old and venerable person
comes to his abode. He gets them back by standing up and properly
saluting the guest. Old men should always be saluted. One should, upon
seeing them, offer seats with one's own hand. After the old man has taken
his seat, one should seat oneself and remain with hands joined in
reverence. When an old man goes along the road, one should always follow
him instead of walking ahead. One should never sit on a torn or broken
seat. One should, without using it any longer, cast away a broken vessel
of white brass. One should never eat without a piece of upper garment
wrapping one's body. One should never bathe in a state of nudity. One
should never sleep in a state of nudity. One should never even touch the
remnants of other people's dishes and plates. One should never, while one
is in an impure state, touch another's head, for it is said in the
scriptures that the life-breaths are all concentrated in the head. One
should never strike another on the head or seize another by the hair. One
should not join one's hands together for scratching one's head. One
should not, while bathing, repeatedly dip one's head in water. By so
doing one shortens one's life. One who has bathed by dipping the head in
water should not, afterwards, apply oil to any part of one's body. One
should never take a meal without eating some sesame. One should never
teach (the Vedas or any scriptures) at a time when one is impure. Nor
should one study while one is impure. When a storm rises or a bad odour
permeates in the atmosphere, one should never think of the Vedas. Persons
conversant with ancient history recite a Gatha sung by Yama in days of
old. He that runs while impure or studies the Vedas under similar
circumstances, indeed, that regenerate Brahman who studies the Vedas at
forbidden times, loses his Vedas and shortens his life. Hence, one should
never study the Vedas with concentrated attention at forbidden times.
They who answer a call of nature, with face towards the sun, or towards a
blazing fire, or towards a cow, or towards a regenerate person, or on the
road, become shortlived. At daytime both calls of nature should be
answered with face turned towards the north. At night, those calls should
be answered facing the south. By so doing one does not shorten one's
life. One that wishes to live long should never disregard or insult any
of these three, however weak or emaciated they may appear to be, viz.,
the Brahmana, the Kshatriya, and the snake. All three are endued with
virulent poison. The snake, if angry, burns the victim with only a glance
of its eyes. The Kshatriya also, if angry, burns the objects of his
wrath, as soon as he sees him, with his energy. The Brahmana, stronger
than any of these two, destroys not only the objects of his wrath but his
whole race as well, not by vision alone but by thought also.[466] The man
of wisdom should, therefore, tend these three with care. One should,
never engage in any disputation with one's preceptor. O Yudhishthira, if
the preceptor becomes angry, he should always be pacified by due honours
being paid to him. Even if the preceptor happens to be entirely wrong,
one should still follow and honour him. Without doubt, calumnious sayings
against the preceptor always consume the lives of those that utter them.
One should always answer a call of nature at a spot far removed from
one's habitation. One should wash one's feet at a distance from one's
habitation. One should always throw the remnants of one's dishes and
plates at a spot far removed from one's habitation. Verily, he who
desires his own good should do all these. One should not wear garlands of
red flowers. Indeed, they who are possessed of wisdom should wear
garlands of flowers that are white in hue. Rejecting the lotus and the
lily, O thou of great might, one may bear on one's head, however, a
flower that is red, even if it be an aquatic one.[467] A garland of gold
can under no circumstances become impure. After one has bathed, O king,
one should use perfumes mixed with water.[468] One should never wear
one's upper garment for covering the lower limbs or the lower garments
for covering the upper ones. Nor should one wear clothes worn by another.
One should not, again, wear a piece of cloth that has not its lateral
fringes.[469] When one goes to bed, O king, one should wear a different
piece of cloth. When making a journey also on a road, one should wear a
different piece of cloth. So also, when worshipping the deities, one
should wear a different piece of cloth.[470] The man of intelligence
should smear his limbs with unguents made of Priyangu, sandalwood, Vilwa,
Tagara, and Kesara.[471] In observing a fast, one should purify oneself
by a bath, and adorn one's person with ornaments and unguents. One should
always abstain from sexual congress on days of the full moon and the new
moon. One should never, O monarch, eat off the same plate with another
even if that other happens to be of one's own or equal rank. Nor should
one ever eat any food that has been prepared by a woman in her functional
period. One should never eat any food or drink, any liquid whose essence
has been taken off. Nor should one eat anything without giving a portion
thereof to persons that wishfully gaze at the food that one happens to
take. The man of intelligence should never sit close to one that is
impure. Nor should one sit close to persons that are foremost in
piety.[472] All food that is forbidden in ritual acts should never be
taken even on other occasions. The fruits of the Ficus religiosa and the
Ficus Bengalensis as also the leaves of the Crotolaria Juncea, and the
fruits of the Ficus glomerata, should never be eaten by one who is
desirous of his own good. The flesh of goats, of kine, and the peacock,
should never be eaten. One should also abstain from dried flesh and all
flesh that is stale. The man of intelligence should never eat any salt,
taking it up with his hand. Nor should he eat curds and flour of fried
barley at night. One should abstain also from flesh of animals not slain
in sacrifices. One should, with concentrated attention, eat once on the
morning and once in the evening, abstaining entirely from all food,
during the interval. One should never eat any food in which one may
detect a hair. Nor should one eat at the Sraddha of an enemy. One should
eat silently; one should never eat without covering one's person with an
upper garment, and without sitting down.[473] One should never eat any
food placing it on the bare ground. One should never eat except in a
sitting posture. One should never make any noise while eating.[474] The
man of intelligence should first offer water and then food to one that
has become his guest, and after having served the guest thus, should then
sit to his meals himself. He who sits down to dinner in a line with
friends and himself eats any food without giving thereof to his friends,
is said to eat virulent poison. As regards water and Payasa and flour of
fried barley and curds and ghee and honey, one should never, after
drinking or eating these, offer the remnants thereof to others. One
should never, O chief of men, eat any food doubtingly.[475] One desirous
of food should never drink curds at the conclusion of a meal. After the
meal is finished, one should wash one's mouth and face with the (right)
hand only, and taking a little water should then dip the toe of the right
foot in it. After washing, one should touch the crown of one's head with
the (right) hand. With concentrated attention, one should next touch
fire. The man who knows how to observe all these ordinances with care,
succeeds in attaining to the foremost place among his kinsmen. One
should, after finishing one's meals, with one's nose and eyes and ears
and navel and both hands wash with water. One should not, however, keep
one's hands wet. Between the tip and the root of the thumb is situate the
sacred Tirtha known by the name of Brahma. On the back of the little
finger, it is said, is situate the Deva-tirtha. The intervening space
between the thumb and the forefinger, O Bharata, should be used for
discharging the Pitri rites, after touching water according to the
ordinance.[476] One should never indulge in other people's calumny. Nor
should one ever utter anything that is disagreeable. The man that desires
his own good should never seek to provoke against himself the wrath of
others. One should never seek to converse with a person that has fallen
away from his order. The very sight of such a person should be avoided.
One should never come in contact with a fallen person. By avoiding such
contact one succeeds in attaining to a long life. One should never
indulge in sexual congress at day-time. Nor should one have congress with
a maiden, nor with a harlot nor with a barren woman. One should never
have congress with a woman that has not bathed after the expiry of her
functional period. By avoiding such acts one succeeds in attaining to a
long life. After washing the several limbs directed, in view of religious
acts, one should wash one's lips thrice, and once more twice. By doing
this, one becomes purified and fit for religious acts. The several organs
of sense should each be washed once, and water should also be sprinkled
over the whole body. Having done this, one should go through the worship
of the Pitris and the deities, agreeably with the ordinances of the
Vedas. Listen to me, O thou of Kuru's race, as I tell thee what
purification is cleansing and beneficial for a Brahmana. Before beginning
to eat and after finishing the meal, and in all acts requiring
purification, the Brahmana should perform the achamana with water placed
on the limb called the Brahmatirtha.[477] After ejecting any matter from
the throat or spitting, one should wash one's mouth before one can become
pure. A kinsman who happens to be old, or a friend who happens to be
poor, should be established in one's house and his comforts looked after
as if he were a member of the family. By doing this, one succeeds in
acquiring both fame and long life. The establishment of pigeons in one's
house is fraught with blessedness, as also of parrots both male and
female. If female these taken to one's abode, they succeed in dispelling
calamity. The same is the case with cockroaches, If fireflies and
vultures and wood-pigeons and bees enter a house or seek residence in it,
acts of propitiating the deities should be performed. These are creatures
of evil omen, as also ospreys. One should never divulge the secrets of
high-souled men; one should never have sexual congress with a forbidden
woman. Nor should one ever have such congress with the spouse of a king
or with women that are the friends of queens. One should never cultivate
intimacy with physicians, or with children, or with persons that are old,
or with one's servants, O Yudhishthira. One should always provide for
friends, for Brahmanas, and for such as seek one's protection. By doing
this, O king, one acquires a long life. The man of wisdom should reside
in such a house as has been constructed with the aid of a Brahmana and an
engineer skilled in his profession, if indeed, O king, he desires his own
good.[478] One should not, O king, sleep at the evening twilight. Nor
should one study at such an hour for acquiring any branch of knowledge.
The man of intelligence should never eat also at such an hour. By acting
in this way one acquires a long life. One should never perform any act in
honour of the Pitris at night time. One should not deck one's person
after finishing one's meals. One should bathe at night, if one desires
one's own advancement. One should also, O Bharata, always abstain from
the flour of fried barley at night. The remnants of food and drink, as
also the flowers with which one has worshipped the deities, should never
be used. Inviting a guest at night, one should never, with excessive
courtesy, force him to eat to the point of gratification. Nor should one
eat oneself to the point of gratification, at night. One should not slay
a bird (for eating it), especially after having fed it.[479] One
possessed of wisdom should wed a maiden born in a high family, endued
with auspicious indications, and of full age. Begetting children upon her
and thus perpetuating one's race by that means, one should make over
one's sons to a good preceptor for acquiring general knowledge, O
Bharata, as also a knowledge of the especial customs of the family, O
monarch. The daughters that one may beget should be bestowed upon youths
of respectable families, that are again possessed of intelligence. Sons
should also be established and a portion of the family inheritance, given
to them, O Bharata, as their provision. One should bathe by dipping one's
head in water before one sits down to perform any act in honour of the
Pitris of the deities. One should never perform a Sraddha under the
constellation of one's nativity. No Sraddha should be performed under any
of the Bhadrapadas (prior or later), nor under the constellation
Krittika, O Bharata. The Sraddha should never be performed under any of
those constellations that are regarded as fierce (such as Aslesha, etc )
and any of those that, upon calculation, seem to be hostile. Indeed, in
this respect, all these constellations should be avoided which are
forbidden in treatises on astrology. One should sit facing either the
east or the north while undergoing a shave at the hands of the barber. By
so doing, O great king, one succeeds in acquiring a long life. One should
never indulge in other people's calumny or self-reproach, for, O chief of
the Bharatas, it is said that calumny is sinful, whether of others or of
oneself. In wedding, one should avoid a woman that is deficient of any
limb. A maiden too, if such, should also be avoided. A woman of the same
Pravaras should also be avoided; as also one that has any malformation;
as also one that has been born in the race to which one's mother
belongs.[480] One possessed of wisdom should never have sexual congress
with a woman that is old, or one that has abandoned the domestic mode of
life for entering the forest mode, or one that is true to her lord, or
one whose organs of generation are not healthy or well-formed.[481] It
behoveth thee not to wed a woman that is of a yellow complexion, or one
that is afflicted with leprosy, or one born in a family in which there
has been epilepsy, or one that is low in birth and habits, or one that is
born in a family in which the disease called Switra (leprosy) has
appeared, or one belonging by birth to a race in which there are early
deaths. Only that maiden who is endued with auspicious indications, and
who is accomplished for qualifications of diverse kinds, who is agreeable
and handsome, should be wedded. One should wed, O Yudhishthira, in a
family that is higher or at least equal to one's own. One who is desirous
of one's own prosperity, should never wed a woman that is of an inferior
order or that has fallen away from the order of her birth. Carefully
igniting the fire, one should accomplish all those acts which have been
ordained and declared in the Vedas or by the Brahmanas.[482] One should
never seek to injure women. Spouses should always be protected. Malice
always shortens life. Hence, one should always abstain from cherishing
malice. Sleep at day-time shortens life. To sleep after the sun has risen
shortens life. They who sleep at any of the twilights, or at nightfall or
who go to sleep in a state of impurity, have their lives shortened.
Adultery always shortens life. One should not remain in a state of
impurity after shaving.[483] One should, O Bharata, carefully abstain
from studying or reciting the Vedas, and eating, and bathing, at
eventide. When the evening twilight comes, one should collect one's
senses for meditation, without doing any act. One should, O king, bathe
and then worship the Brahmanas. Indeed, one should bathe before
worshipping the deities and reverentially saluting the preceptor. One
should never go to a sacrifice unless invited. Indeed, one may go there
without an invitation if one wishes only to see how the sacrifice is
conducted. If one goes to a sacrifice (for any other purpose) without an
invitation and if one does not, on that account, receive proper worship
from the sacrificer, one's life becomes shortened. One should never go
alone on a journey to foreign parts. Nor should one ever proceed alone to
any place at night. Before evening comes, one should come back to one's
house and remain within it. One should always obey the commands of one's
mother and father and preceptor, without at all judging whether those
commands are beneficial or otherwise. One should, O king, attend with
great care to the Vedas and the science of arms. Do then, O king,
carefully attend to the practice of riding an elephant, a steed, and a
war-chariot. The man who attends to these with care succeeds in attaining
to happiness. Such a king succeeds in becoming unconquerable by foes, and
sway his servants and kinsmen without any of them being able to get the
better of him. The king that attains to such a position and that
carefully attends to the duty of protecting his subjects, has never to
incur any loss. Thou shouldst acquire, O king, the science of reasoning,
as also the science of words, the science of the Gandharvas, and the four
and sixty branches of knowledge known by the name of Kala. One should
every day hear the Puranas and the Itihasas and all the other narratives
that exist, as also the life-stories of all high-souled personages. When
one's spouse passes through functional period, one should never have
congress with her, nor even summon her for conversation. The man endued
with wisdom may accept her companionship on the fourth day after the bath
of purification. If one indulges in congress on the fifth day from the
first appearance of the functional operation, one gets a daughter. By
indulging in congress on the sixth day, one happens to have a son. The
man of wisdom should in the matter of congress, attend to this rule
(about odd and even days). Kinsmen and relatives by marriage and friends
should all be treated with respect. One should, according to the best of
one's power, adore the deities in sacrifices, giving away diverse kinds
of articles as sacrificial Dakshina. After the period ordained for the
domestic mode of life has been passed, one should, O king, enter the life
of a forest recluse. I have thus told thee all the indications, in brief,
of persons who succeed in living long.[484] What remains untold by me
should be heard by thee from the mouths of persons well-versed in the
three Vedas, O Yudhishthira. Thou shouldst know that conduct is the root
of prosperity. Conduct is the enhancer of fame. It is conduct that
prolongs life. It is conduct that destroys all calamities and evils.
Conduct has been said to be superior to all the branches of knowledge. It
is conduct that begets righteousness, and it is righteousness that
prolongs life. Conduct is productive of fame, of long life, and of
heaven. Conduct is the most efficacious rite of propitiating the deities
(for bringing about auspiciousness of every kind). The Self-born Brahman
himself has said that one should show compassion unto all orders of
men.'"[485]



SECTION CV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O chief of Bharata's race, how the eldest
brother should behave towards his younger brothers and how the younger
brothers should behave towards their eldest brother.'

"Bhishma said, 'Do thou, O son, always behave towards thy younger
brothers as their eldest brother should. Thou art always the eldest of
all these thy brothers. That high conduct which the preceptor should
always adopt towards his disciples should be adopted by thee towards thy
younger brothers. If the preceptor happens to be unendued with wisdom,
the disciple cannot possibly behave towards him in a respectful or proper
way. If the preceptor happens to be possessed of purity and highness of
conduct, the disciple also succeeds in attaining to conduct of the same
kind, O Bharata. The eldest brother should at times be blind to the acts
of his younger brothers, and though possessed of wisdom should at times
act as if he does not understand their acts. If the younger brothers be
guilty of any transgression, the eldest brother should correct them by
indirect ways and means. If there be good understanding among brothers
and if the eldest brother seek to correct his younger brothers by direct
or ostensible means, persons that are enemies, O son of Kunti, that are
afflicted with sorrow at the sight of such good understanding and who,
therefore, always seek to bring about a disunion, set themselves to
disunite the brothers and cause dissension among them. It is the eldest
brother that enhances the prosperity of the family or destroys it
entirely. If the eldest brother happens to be unendued with sense and
wicked in behaviour, he brings about the destruction of the whole family.
The eldest brother who injures his younger brothers ceases to be regarded
as the eldest and forfeits his share in the family property and deserves
to be checked by the king. That man who acts deceitfully, has, without
doubt, to go to regions of grief and every kind of evil. The birth of
such a person serves no useful purpose even as the flowers of the
cane.[486] That family in which a sinful person takes birth becomes
subject to every evil. Such a person brings about infamy, and all the
good acts of the family disappear. Such among the brothers as are wedded
to evil acts forfeit their shares of the family property. In such a case;
the eldest brother may appropriate the whole Yautuka property without
giving any portion thereof to his younger brothers. If the eldest brother
makes any acquisition, without using the paternal property and by going
to a distant place he may appropriate for his own use, such acquisitions,
without giving any share thereof to his younger brothers. If unseparated
brothers desire (during the lifetime of their father) to portion the
family property, the father should give equal shares unto all his sons.
If the eldest brother happens to be of sinful acts and undistinguished by
accomplishments of any kind he may be disregarded by his younger
brothers. If the wife or the younger brother happens to be sinful, her or
his good must still be looked after. Persons conversant with the efficacy
of righteousness say that righteousness is the highest good. The
Upadhyaya is superior to even ten Acharyas. The sire is equal to ten
Upadhyayas. The mother is equal to ten sires or even the whole earth.
There is no senior equal to the mother Verily, she transcends all in
respect of the reverence due to her.[487] It is for this reason that
people regard the mother to deserve so much reverence. After the father
has ceased to breathe, O Bharata, the eldest brother should be regarded
as the father. It is the eldest brother who should assign unto them their
means of support and protect and cherish them. All the younger brothers
should bow to him and obey his authority. Indeed, they should live in
dependence upon him even as they did upon their father while he was
alive. So far as the body is concerned, O Bharata, it is the father and
the mother that create it. That birth, however, which the Acharya
ordains, is regarded as the true birth, that is, besides, really unfading
and immortal. The eldest sister, O chief of Bharata's race, is like unto
the mother The wife of the eldest brother also is like unto the mother,
for the younger brother, in infancy, receives, suck from her.'"[488]



SECTION CVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'The disposition is seen, O grandsire, in all the
orders of men, including the very Mlechchhas, of observing fasts. The
reason, however, of this is not known to us. It has been heard by us that
only Brahmanas and Kshatriyas should observe the vow of fasts. How, O
grandsire, are the other orders to be taken as earning any merit by the
observance of fasts? How have vows and fasts come to be observed by
persons of all orders, O king? What is that end to which one devoted to
the observance of fasts attains? It has been said that fasts are highly
meritorious and that fasts are a great refuge. O prince of men, what is
the fruit that is earned in this world by the man that observe fasts? By
what means is one cleansed of one's sins? By what means doth one acquire
righteousness? By what means, O best of the Bharatas, doth one succeed in
acquiring heaven and merit? After having observed a fast, what should one
give away, O king? O, tell me, what those duties are by which one may
succeed in obtaining such objects as lead to happiness?'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Unto Kunti's son by the deity of Dharma, who
was conversant with every duty and who said so unto him, Santanu's son,
Bhishma, who was acquainted with every duty, answered in the following
words.'

"Bhishma, said, 'In former days, O king, I heard of these high merits, O
chief of Bharata's race, as attaching to the observance of fasts
according to the ordinance, I had, O Bharata, asked the Rishi Angiras of
high ascetic merit, the very same questions which thou hast asked me
today. Questioned by me thus, the illustrious Rishi, who sprang from the
sacrificial fire, answered me even thus in respect of the observance of
fasts according to the ordinance.'

"Angiras said, 'As regards Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, fasts for three
nights at a stretch are ordained for them, O delighter of the Kurus.
Indeed, O chief of men, a fast for one night, for two nights, and for
three nights, may be observed by them. (They should never go beyond three
nights). As regards Vaisyas and Sudras, the duration of fasts prescribed
for them is a single night. If, from folly, they observe fasts for two or
three nights, such fasts never lead to their advancement. Indeed, for
Vaisyas and Sudras, fasts for two nights have been ordained (on certain
special occasions). Fasts for three nights, however, have not been laid
down for them by persons conversant with and observant of duties. That
man of wisdom who, with his senses and soul under control, O Bharata,
fasts, by abstaining from one of the two meals, on the fifth and the
sixth days of the moon as also on the day of the full moon, becomes
endured with forgiveness and beauty of person and conversance with the
scriptures. Such a person never becomes childless and poor. He who
performs sacrifices for adoring the deities on the fifth and sixth days
of the moon, transcends all the members of his family and succeeds in
feeding a large number of Brahmanas. He who observes fasts on the eighth
and the fourteenth days of the dark fortnight, becomes freed from
maladies of every kind and possessed of great energy. The man who
abstains from one meal every day throughout the month called Margasirsha,
should, with reverence and devotion, feed a number of Brahmanas. By so
doing he becomes freed from all his sins. Such a man becomes endued with
prosperity, and all kinds of grain become his. He becomes endued with
energy. In fact, such a person reaps an abundance of harvest from his
fields, acquires great wealth and much corn. That man, O son of Kunti,
who passes the whole month of Pausha, abstaining every day from one of
two meals, becomes endued with good fortune and agreeable features and
great fame. He who passes the whole month of Magha, abstaining every day
from one of the two meals, takes birth in a high family and attains to a
position of eminence among his kinsmen. He who passes the whole month of
Bhagadaivata, confining himself every day to only one meal becomes a
favourite with women who, indeed, readily own his sway. He who passes the
whole of the month of Chaitra, confining himself every day to one meal,
takes birth in a high family and becomes rich in gold, gems, and pearls.
The person, whether male or female, who passes the month of Vaisakha,
confining himself or herself every day to one meal, and keeping his or
her senses under control, succeeds in attaining to a position of eminence
among kinsmen. The person who passes the month of Jyaishtha confining
himself every day to one meal a day, succeeds in attaining to a position
of eminence and great wealth. If a woman, she reaps the same reward. He
who passes the month of Ashadha confining himself to one meal a day and
with senses steadily concentrated upon his duties, becomes possessed of
much corn, great wealth, and a large progeny. He who passes the month of
Sravana, confining himself to one meal a day, receives the honours of
Abhisheka wherever he may happen to reside, and attains to a position of
eminence among kinsmen whom he supports. That man who confines himself to
only one meal a day for the whole month of Proshthapada, becomes endued
with great wealth and attains, to swelling and durable affluence. The man
who passes the month of Aswin, confining himself to one meal a day,
becomes pure in soul and body, possessed of animals and vehicles in
abundance, and a large progeny. He who passes the month of Kartika,
confining himself to one meal every day, becomes possessed of heroism,
many spouses, and great fame. I have now told thee, O chief of men what
the fruits are that are obtained by men by observing fasts for the two
and ten months in detail. Listen now, O king, to me as I tell thee what
the rules are in respect of each of the lunar days. The man who,
abstaining from it every day, takes rice at the expiration of every
fortnight, becomes possessed of a great many kine, a large progeny, and a
long life. He who observes a fast for three nights every month and
conducts himself thus for two and ten years, attains to a position of
supremacy among his kinsmen and associates, without a rival to contest
his claim and without any anxiety caused by any one endeavouring to rise
to the same height. These rules that I speak of, O chief of Bharata's
race, should be observed for two and ten years. Let the inclination be
manifested towards it. That man who eats once in the forenoon and once
after evening and abstains from drinking (or eating anything) in the
interval, and who observes compassion, towards all creatures and pours
libations of clarified butter on his sacred fire every day, attains to
success, O king, in six years. There is no doubt in this. Such a man
earns the merit that attaches to the performance of the Agnishtoma
sacrifice. Endued with merit and freed from every kind of stain, he
attains to the region of the Apsaras that echo with the sound of songs
and dance, and passes his days in the company of a thousand damsels of
great beauty. He rides on a car of the complexion of melted gold and
receives high honours in the region of Brahma. After the exhaustion of
that merit such a person comes back to earth and attains to pre-eminence
of position. That man who passes one whole year, confining himself every
day to only one meal, attains to the merit of the Atiratra sacrifice. He
ascends to heaven after death and receives great honours there. Upon the
exhaustion of that merit he returns to earth and attains to a position of
eminence. He who passes one whole year observing fasts for three days in
succession and taking food on every fourth day, and abstaining from
injury from every kind adheres to truthfulness of speech and keeps his
senses under control, attains to the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
Such a person ascends to heaven after death and receives high honours
there. That man, O son of Kunti, who passes a whole year observing fasts
for five days and taking food on only the sixth day, acquires the merit
of the Horse-sacrifice. The chariot he rides is drawn by Chakravakas.
Such a man enjoys every kind of happiness in heaven for full forty
thousand years. He who passes a whole year observing fasts for seven days
and taking food on only every eighth day, acquires the merit of the
Gavamaya sacrifice. The chariot he rides is drawn by swans and cranes.
Such a person enjoys all kinds of happiness in Heaven for fifty thousand
years. He who passes a whole year, O king, eating only at intervals of a
fortnight, acquires the merit of a continuous fast for six months. This
has been said by the illustrious Angiras himself. Such a man dwells in
heaven for sixty thousand years. He is roused every morning from his bed
by the sweet notes of Vinas and Vallakis and flutes, O king. He who
passes a whole year, drinking only a little water at the expiration of
every month, acquires, O monarch, the merit of the Viswajit sacrifice.
Such a man rides a chariot drawn by lions and tigers. He dwells in heaven
for seventy thousand years in the enjoyment of every kind of happiness.
No fast for more than a month, O chief of men, has been ordained. Even
this, O son of Pritha, is the ordinance in respect of fasts that has been
declared by sages conversant with duties. That man who, unafflicted by
disease and free from every malady, observes a fast, verily acquires, at
every step the merits that attach to Sacrifices. Such a man ascends to
Heaven on a car drawn by swans. Endued with puissance, he enjoys every
kind of happiness in heaven for a hundred years. A hundred Apsaras of the
most beautiful features wait upon and sport with him. He is roused from
his bed every morning by the sound of the Kanchis and the Nupuras of
those damsels.[489] Such a person rides on a car drawn by a thousand
swans. Dwelling, again, in a region teeming with hundreds of the most
beautiful damsels, he passes his time in great joy. The person who is
desirous of heaven does not like the accession of strength when he
becomes weak, or the cure of wounds when he is wounded, or the
administration of healing drugs when he is ill, or soothing by others
when he is angry, or the mitigation, by the expenditure of wealth, of
sorrows caused by poverty, Leaving this world where he suffers only
privations of every kind, he proceeds to heaven and rides on cars adorned
with gold, his person embellished with ornaments of every kind. There, in
the midst of hundreds of beautiful damsels, he enjoys all kinds of
pleasure and happiness, cleansed of every sin. Indeed, abstaining from
food and enjoyments in this world, he takes leave of this body and
ascends to heaven as the fruit of his penances. There, freed from all his
sins, health and happiness become his and whatever wishes arise in his
mind become crowned with fruition. Such a person rides on a celestial car
of golden complexion, of the effulgence of the morning sun, set with
pearls and lapis lazuli, resounding with the music of Vinas and Murajas,
adorned with banners and lamps, and echoing with the tinkle of celestial
bells, such a person enjoys all kinds of happiness in heaven for as many
years as there are pores in his body. There is no Sastra superior to the
Veda. There is no person more worthy of reverence than the mother. There
is no acquisition superior to that of Righteousness, and no penance
superior to fast. There is nothing, more sacred, in heaven or earth, than
Brahmanas. After the same manner there is no penance that is superior to
the observance of fasts. It was by fasts that the deities have succeeded
in becoming denizens of heaven. It is by fasts that the Rishis have
attained to high success. Viswamitra passed a thousand celestial years,
confining himself every day to only one meal, and as the consequence
thereof attained to the status of a Brahmana. Chyavana and Jamadagni and
Vasishtha and Gautama and Bhrigu--all these great Rishis endued with the
virtue of forgiveness, have attained to heaven through observance of
fasts. In former days Angiras declared so unto the great Rishis. The man
who teaches another the merit of fasts have never to suffer any kind of
misery. The ordinances about fasts, in their due order, O son of Kunti,
have flowed from the great Rishi Angiras. The man who daily reads these
ordinances or hears them read, becomes freed from sins of every kind. Not
only is such a person freed from every calamity, but his mind becomes
incapable of being touched by any kind of fault. Such a person succeeds
in understanding the sounds of all creatures other than human, and
acquiring eternal fame, become foremost of his species.'"



SECTION CVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O high-souled grandsire, thou hast duly discoursed
to us on the subject of Sacrifices, including the merits in detail that
attach to them both here and hereafter. It should be remembered, however,
O grandsire, that Sacrifices are incapable of being performed, by people
that are poor, for these require a large store of diverse kinds of
articles. Indeed, O grandsire, the merit attaching to Sacrifices can be
acquired by only kings and princes. That merit is incapable of being
acquired by those that are destitute of wealth and divested of ability
and that live alone and are helpless. Do thou tell us, O grandsire, what
the ordinances are in respect of those acts that are fraught with merit
equal to what attaches to sacrifices and which, therefore, are capable of
being performed by persons destitute of means.'[490]

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O Yudhishthira! Those ordinances that I have told
thee of,--those, viz., that were first promulgated by the great Rishi
Angiras, and that have reference to meritorious facts for their
soul,--are regarded as equal to Sacrifices (in respect of the fruits they
bring about both here and hereafter). That man who takes one meal in the
forenoon and one at night, without taking any food or drink during the
interval, and who observes this regulations for a period of six years in
succession, abstaining all the while from injuring any creature and
regularly pouring libations on his sacred fire every day, attains,
without doubt, to success. Such a man acquires hereafter a car of the
complexion of heated gold, and attains to a residence, for millions of
years, in the region of Prajapati, in the company of celestial damsels,
that ever echoes with the sound of music and dance, and blazes with the
effulgence of fire. He who passes three years, confining himself every
day to one meal and abstaining all the while from congress with any other
woman save his own wedded wife, attains to the merit of the Agnishtoma
sacrifice, Such a man is regarded as having performed a Sacrifice, with
plenty of gifts in gold, that is dear to Vasava himself. By practising
truthfulness of speech, making gifts, reverencing the Brahmanas, avoiding
malice, becoming forgiving and self-restrained, and conquering wrath, a
man attains to the highest end. Riding on a car of the complexion of
white clouds that is drawn by swans, he lives, for millions and million
of years, in the company of Apsaras. Fasting for a whole day and eating
only one meal on the second day, he who pours libations upon his sacred
fire for the period of a whole year,--verily, he who observes such a fast
and attends every day to his fire and rises every day from bed before
sunrise, attains to the merit of the Agnishtoma sacrifice. Such a man
acquires a car drawn by swans and cranes. Surrounded by the most
beautiful damsels, he resides in the region of Indra. That man who eats
only one meal every third day, and pours libations every day on his
sacred fire for a period of a whole year,--indeed, he who thus attends to
his fire every day and wakes up from sleep every morning before the sun
is up, attains to the high merit of the Atiratra sacrifice. He acquires a
car drawn by peacocks and swans and cranes. Proceeding to the region of
the seven (celestial) Rishis, he takes up his residence there, surrounded
by Apsaras of great beauty. It is well-known that such residence lasts
for full three Padmas of years.[491] Fasting for three days in
succession, he who takes only one meal every fourth day, and pours
libations every day on his sacred fire, acquires the high merit of the
Vajapeya sacrifice. The car he ac-quires is graced by celestial damsels
of great beauty that have Indra for their father. He resides in the
region of Indra for millions and millions of years and experiences great
happiness by witnessing the sports of the chief of the deities. Fasting
for four days in succession, he who eats only one meal every fifth day,
and pours libations on the sacred fire every day for the period of a
whole year, and who lives without cupidity, telling the truth,
reverencing the Brahmanas, abstaining from every kind of injury, and
avoiding malice and sin, acquires the merit of the Vajapeya sacrifice.
The car he rides is made of gold and drawn by swans and endued with the
effulgence of many suns rising together. He acquires, a palatial mansion
of pure white. He lives there in great happiness for full one and fifty
Padmas of years.[492] Fasting for five days, he who takes food on only
the sixth day, and pours libations on his sacred fire every day for a
whole year, and who performs three ablutions in course of the day for
purifying himself and saying his prayers and doing his worship, and who
leads a life of Brahmacharya, divested of malice in his conduct, acquires
the merit of the Gomedha sacrifice. He acquires an excellent car adorned
with pure gold, possessed of the effulgence of a blazing fire and drawn
by swans and peacocks. He sleeps on the lap of Apsaras and is awakened
every morning by the melodious tinkle of Nupuras and Kanchis. He leads
such a life of happiness for ten thousand million years and three
thousand million besides and eight and ten Padmas and two Patakas.[493]
Such a man resides also, honoured by all, in the region of Brahma for as
many years as there are hairs on the bodies of hundreds of bears. Fasting
for six days, he who eats only one meal every seventh day and pours
libations on the sacred fire every day, for a full year, restraining
speech all the while and observing the vow of Brahmacharya, and
abstaining from the use of flowers and unguents and honey and meat,
attains to the region of the Maruts and of India. Crowned with the
fruition of every desire as it springs up in the mind, he is waited upon
and adored by celestial damsels. He acquires the merits of a sacrifice in
which abundance of gold is given away. Proceeding to the regions named,
he lives there for countless years in the greatest happiness[494]. He who
shows forgiveness to all and fasting for seven days eats on every eighth
day for a whole year, and, pouring libations every day on the sacred
fire, adores the deities regularly, acquires the high merits of the
Paundarika sacrifice. The car he rides is of a colour like that of the
lotus. Without doubt, such a man acquires also a large number of damsels,
possessed of youth and beauty, some having complexions that are dark,
some with complexions like that of gold, and some that are Syamas, whose
looks and attitudes are of the most agreeable kind. He who fasts for
eight days and takes only one meal on every ninth day for a whole year,
and pours libations on the sacred fire every day, acquires the high
merits of a thousand Horse-sacrifices. The car he rides in Heaven is as
beautiful as a lotus. He always makes his journeys on that car,
accompanied by the daughters of Rudra adorned with celestial garlands and
endued with the effulgence of the midday sun or the fires of blazing
flames. Attaining to the regions of Rudra, he lives there in great
happiness for countless years. He who fasts for nine days and takes only
one meal every tenth day for a whole year, and pours libations on his
sacred fire every day, acquires the high merit of a thousand
Horse-sacrifices, and attains to the companionship of Brahmanas'
daughters endued with beauty capable of charming the hearts of all
creatures. These damsels, possessed of such beauty, and some of them
possessed of complexion like that of the lotus and some like that of the
same flower of the blue variety, always keep him in joy[495]. He acquires
a beautiful vehicle, that moves in beautiful circles and that looks like
the dense cloud called Avarta, verily, it may be said to resemble also an
ocean-wave. That vehicle resounds with the constant tinkle of rows of
pearls and gems, and the melodious blare of conchs, and is adorned with
columns made of crystals and diamonds, as also with an altar constructed
of the same minerals. He makes his journeys on such a car, drawn by swans
and cranes and lives for millions and millions of years in great
happiness in heaven. He who fasts for ten days and eats only ghee on
every eleventh day for a whole year and pours libations on his sacred
fire every day, who never, in word or thought, covets the companionship
of other people's wives and who never utters an untruth even for the sake
of his mother and father, succeeds in beholding Mahadeva of great
puissance seated on his car. Such a person acquires the high merit of a
thousand Horse-sacrifices. He beholds the car of the Self-born Brahman
himself approach for taking him on it. He rides in it, accompanied by
celestial damsels possessed of great beauty, and complexion as effulgent
as that of pure gold. Endued with the blazing splendour of the Yoga-fire,
he lives for countless years in a celestial mansion in heaven, full of
every happiness. For those countless years he experiences the joy of
bending his head in reverence unto Rudra adored by deities and Danavas.
Such a person obtains every day the sight of the great deity. That man
who having fasted for eleven days eats only a little ghee on the twelfth,
and observes this conduct for a whole year, succeeds in obtaining the
merits attaching to all the sacrifices. The car he rides in is possessed
of the effulgence of a dozen suns. Adorned with gems and pearls and
corals of great value, embellished with rows of swans and snakes and of
peacocks and Chakravakas uttering their melodious notes, and beautified
with large domes, is the residence to which he attains in the region of
Brahman. That abode, O king, is always filled with men and women (who
wait upon him for service). Even this is what the highly blessed Rishi
Angiras, conversant with every duty, said (regarding the fruits of such a
fast). That man who having fasted for twelve days eats a little ghee on
the thirteenth, and bears himself in this way for a whole year, succeeds
in attaining to the merits of the divine sacrifice. Such a man obtains a
car of the complexion of the newly-blown lotus, adorned with pure gold
and heaps of jewels and gems. He proceeds to the region of the Maruts
that teem with celestial damsels, that are adorned with every kind of
celestial ornament, that are redolent with celestial perfumes, and that
contain every element of felicity. The number of years he resides in
those happy regions is countless[496]. Soothed with the sound of music
and the melodious voice of Gandharvas and the sounds and blare of drums
and Panavas, he is constantly gladdened by celestial damsels of great
beauty. That man who having fasted for thirteen days eats a little ghee
on the fourteenth day, and bears himself in this way for a full year,
obtains the merits of the Mahamedha sacrifice.[497] Celestial damsels of
indescribable beauty, and whose age cannot be guessed for they are for
ever young in appearance, adorned with every ornament and with armlets of
blazing effulgence, wait upon him with many cars and follow him in his
journeys. He is waked every morning from his bed by the melodious voice
of swans, the tinkle of Nupuras, and the highly agreeable jingle of
Kanchis. Verily, he resides in a superior abode, waited upon by such
celestial damsels, for years as countless as the sands on the shores of
Ganga. That man who, keeping his senses under control, fasts for a
fortnight and takes only one meal on the sixteenth day, and bears himself
in this way for a whole year, pouring libations every day on his sacred
fire, acquires the high merits that attach to a thousand Rajasuya
sacrifices. The car he rides in is possessed of great beauty and is drawn
by swans and peacocks. Riding in such a vehicle, that is, besides,
adorned with garlands of pearls and the purest gold and graced with
bevies of celestial damsels decked with ornaments of every kind, having
one column and four arches and seven altars exceedingly auspicious,
endued with thousands of banners and echoing with the sound of music,
celestial and of celestial attributes, embellished with gems and pearls
and corals, and possessed of the effulgence of lightning, such a man
lives in heaven for a thousand Yugas, having elephants and rhinoceroses
for dragging that vehicle of his. That man who having fasted for fifteen
days takes one meal on the sixteenth day and bears himself in this way
for one whole year, acquires the merits attaching to the Soma sacrifice.
Proceeding to Heaven he lives in the company of Soma's daughters. His
body fragrant with unguents whose perfumes are as sweet as those of Soma
himself, he acquires the power of transporting himself immediately to any
place he likes. Seated on his car he is waited upon by damsels of the
most beautiful features and agreeable manners, and commands all articles
of enjoyment. The period for which he enjoys such happiness consists of
countless years.[498] That man who having fasted for sixteen days eats a
little ghee on the seventeenth day and bears himself in this way for a
whole year, pouring libations every day on his sacred fire, proceeds to
the regions of Varuna and Indra, and Rudra and the Maruts and Usanas and
Brahman himself. There he is waited upon by celestial damsels and obtains
a sight of the celestial Rishi called Bhurbhuva and grasps the whole
universe in his ken. The daughters of the deity of the deities gladden
him there. Those damsels, of agreeable manners and adorned with every
ornament, are capable of assuming two and thirty forms. As long as the
Sun and the Moon move in firmament, so long does that man of wisdom
reside in those regions of felicity, subsisting upon the succulence of
ambrosia and nectar. That man who having fasted for seventeen days eats
only one meal on the eighteenth day, and bears himself in this way for a
whole year, succeeds in grasping the seven regions, of which the universe
consist, in his ken. While performing his journeys on his car he is
always followed by a large train of cars producing the most agreeable
rattle and ridden by celestial damsels blazing with ornament and beauty.
Enjoying the greatest happiness, the vehicle he rides in is celestial and
endued with the greatest beauty. It is drawn by lions and tigers, and
produces a rattle as deep as the sound of the clouds. He lives in such
felicity for a thousand Kalpas subsisting upon the succulence of ambrosia
that is as sweet as nectar itself. That man who having fasted for
eighteen days eats only one meal on the nineteenth day and bears himself
in this way for a full year, succeeds in grasping within his ken all the
seven regions of which the universe consists. The region to which he
attains is inhabited by diverse tribes, of Apsaras and resounds with the
melodious voice of Gandharvas. The car he rides in is possessed of the
effulgence of the sun. His heart being freed from every anxiety, he is
waited upon by the foremost of celestial damsels. Decked with celestial
garlands, and possessed of beauty of form, he lives in such happiness for
millions and millions of years. That man who having fasted for nineteen
days eats only one meal on every twentieth day and bears himself in this
way for a full year, adhering all the while to truthfulness of speech and
to the observance of other (excellent) rituals, abstaining also from
meat, leading the life of a Brahmacharin, and devoted to the good of all
creatures, attains to the extensive legions, of great happiness,
belonging to the Adityas. While performing his journeys on his own car,
he is followed by a large train of cars ridden by Gandharvas and Apsaras
decked with celestial garlands and unguents. That man who having fasted
for twenty days takes a single meal on the twenty-first day and bears
himself in this way for a full year, pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire, attains to the regions of Usanas and Sakra, of the Aswins
and the Maruts, and resides there in uninterrupted happiness of great
measure. Unacquainted with sorrow of every kind, he rides in the foremost
of cars for making his journeys, and waited upon by the foremost of
celestials, damsels, and possessed of puissance, he sports in joy like a
celestial himself. That man who having fasted for one and twenty days
takes a single meal on the twenty-second day and bears himself in this
way for a full year, pouring libations on his sacred fire every day,
abstaining from injuring any creature, adhering to truthfulness of
speech, and freed from malice attains to the regions of the Vasus and
becomes endued with effulgence of the sun. Possessed of the power of
going everywhere at will, subsisting upon nectar, and riding in the
foremost of cars, his person decked with celestial ornaments, he sports
in joy in the company of celestial damsels. That man who having fasted
for two and twenty days takes a single meal on the twenty-third day and
bears himself in this way for a full year, thus regulating his diet and
keeping his senses under control, attains to the regions of the deity of
Wind, of Usanas, and of Rudra. Capable of going every where at will and
always roving at will, he is worshipped by diverse tribes of Apsaras.
Riding in the foremost of cars and his person decked with celestial
ornaments, he sports for countless years in great felicity in the company
of celestial damsels. That man who having fasted for three and twenty
days eats a little ghee on the twenty-fourth day, and bears himself in
this way for a full year, pouring libations on his sacred fire, resides
for countless years in great happiness in the regions of the Adityas, his
person decked with celestial robes and garlands and celestial perfumes
and unguents. Riding in an excellent car made of gold and possessed of
great beauty and drawn by swans, he sports in joy in the company of
thousands and thousands of celestial damsels. That man who having fasted
for four and twenty days eats a single meal on the twenty-fifth day and
bears himself thus for a full year, succeeds in obtaining a car of the
foremost kind, full of every article of enjoyment. He is followed in his
journeys by a large train of cars drawn by lions and tigers, and
producing a rattle as deep as the roar of the clouds ridden by celestial
damsels, and all made of pure gold and possessed of great beauty. Himself
riding on an excellent celestial car possessed of great beauty, he
resides in those regions for a thousand Kalpas, in the company of
hundreds of celestial damsels, and subsisting upon the succulence of
ambrosia that is sweet as nectar itself. That man who having fasted for
five and twenty days eats only one meal on the twenty-sixth day, and
bears himself thus for a full year in the observance of such a regulation
in respect of diet, keeping his senses under control, freed from
attachment (to worldly objects), and pouring libations every day on his
sacred fire,--that blessed man,--worshipped by the Apsaras, attains to
the regions of the seven Maruts and of the Vasus. When performing his
journeys he is followed by a large train of cars made of excellent
crystal and adorned with all kinds of gems, and ridden by Gandharvas and
Apsaras who show him every honour. He resides in those regions, in
enjoyment of such felicity, and endued with celestial energy, for two
thousand Yugas. That man who having fasted for six and twenty days eats a
single meal on the twenty-seventh day and bears himself in this way for a
full year, pouring libations every day on his sacred fire, acquires great
merit and proceeding to Heaven receives honours from the deities.
Residing there, he subsists on nectar, freed from thirst of every kind,
and enjoying every felicity. His soul purified of every dross and
performing his journeys on a celestial car of great beauty, he lives
there, O king, bearing himself after the manner of the celestial Rishis
and the royal sages. Possessed of great energy, he dwells there in great
happiness in the company of celestial damsels of highly agreeable
manners, for three thousand Yugas and Kalpas. That man who having fasted
for seven and twenty days eats a single meal on the twenty-eighth day and
bears himself in this way for a full year, with soul and senses under
perfect control, acquires very great merit, which, in fact, is equal to
what is acquired by the celestial Rishis. Possessed of every article of
enjoyment, and endued with great energy, he blazes with the effulgence of
the midday sun. Sportive damsels of the most delicate features and endued
with splendour of complexion, having deep bosoms, tapering thighs and
full and round hips, decked with celestial ornaments, gladden him with
their company while he rides on a delightful and excellent car possessed
of the effulgence of the sun and equipped with every article of
enjoyment, for thousands and thousands of Kalpas. That man who having
fasted for eight and twenty days eats a single meal on the twenty-ninth
day, and bears himself in this way for a full year, adhering all the
while to truthfulness of speech, attains to auspicious regions of great
happiness that are worshipped by celestial Rishis and royal sages. The
car he obtains is endued with the effulgence of the sun and the moon;
made of pure gold and adorned with every kind of gem, ridden by Apsaras
and Gandharvas singing melodiously. Thereon he is attained by auspicious
damsels adorned with celestial ornaments of every kind. Possessed of
sweet dispositions and agreeable features, and endued with great energy,
these gladden him with their company. Endued with every article of
enjoyment and with great energy, and possessed of the splendour of a
blazing fire, he shines like a celestial, with a celestial form having
every excellence. The regions he attains are those of the Vasus and the
Maruts, of the Sadhyas and the Aswins, of the Rudras and of Brahman
himself. That man who having fasted for a full month takes a single meal
on the first day of the following month and bears himself in this way for
a full year, looking on all things with an equal eye attains to the
regions of Brahman himself. There he subsists upon the succulence of
ambrosia. Endued with a form of great beauty and highly agreeable to all,
he shines with energy and prosperity like the sun himself of a thousand
rays. Devoted to Yoga and adorned with celestial robes and garlands and
smeared with celestial perfumes and unguents, he passes his time in great
happiness, unacquainted with the least sorrow. He shines on his car
attended by damsels that blaze forth with effulgence emitted by
themselves. Those damsels, the daughters of the celestial Rishis and the
Rudras, adore him with veneration. Capable of assuming diverse forms that
are highly delightful and highly agreeable, their speech is characterised
by diverse kinds of sweetness, and they are able to gladden the person
they wait upon in diverse kinds of ways. While performing his journeys,
he rides on a car that looks like the firmament itself in colour (for
subtlety of the material that compose it). In his rear are cars that look
like the moon; before him are those that resemble the clouds; on his
right are vehicles that are red; below him are those that are blue; and
above him are those that are of variegated hue. He is always adored by
those that wait upon him. Endued with great wisdom, he lives in the
region of Brahman for as many years as are measured by the drops of rain
that fall in course of a thousand years on that division of the earth
which is called Jamvudwipa. Verily, possessed of the effulgence of a
deity, he lives in that region of unalloyed felicity for as many years as
the drops of rain that fall upon the earth in the season of showers. The
man who, having fasted for a whole month, eats on the first day of the
following month, and bears himself in this way for ten years, attains to
the status of a great Rishi. He was not to undergo any change of form
while proceeding to heaven for enjoying the rewards of his acts in his
life. Verily, even this is the status to which one attains by restraining
speech, practising self-denial, subjugating wrath, sexual appetite, and
the desire to eat, pouring libations on the sacred fire, and regularly
adoring the two twilights. That man who purifies himself by the
observance of these and similar vows and practices, and who eats in this
way, becomes as stainless as ether and endued with effulgence like that
of the sun himself.[499] Such a man, O king, proceeding to haven in even
his own carnal form, enjoys all the felicity that is there like a deity
at his will.

'I have thus told thee, O chief of the Bharatas, what the excellent
ordinances are in respect of sacrifices, one after another, as dependent
upon the fruits of fasts.[500] Poor men, O son of Pritha (who are unable
to perform sacrifices) may; nevertheless, acquire the fruits thereof (by
the observance of fasts). Verily, by observing these fasts, even a poor
man may attain to the highest end, O foremost one of Bharata's race,
attending all the while, besides, to the worship of the deities and the
Brahmanas I have thus recited to thee in detail the ordinances in respect
of fasts. Do not harbour any doubt in respect of those men that are so
observant of vows, that are so heedful and pure and high-souled, that are
so freed from pride and contentions of every kind, that are endued with
such devoted understandings, and that pursue their end with such
steadiness and fixity of purpose without ever deviating from their path.'"



SECTION CVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou tell me, O grandsire, of that which is
regarded as the foremost of all Tirthas. Indeed, it behoveth thee to
expound to me what that Tirtha is which conduces to the greatest
purity.'[501]

"Bhishma said, 'Without doubt, all Tirthas are possessed of merit.
Listen, however, with attention to me as I tell thee what the Tirtha, the
cleanser, is of men endued with wisdom. Adhering to eternal Truth, one
should bathe in the Tirtha called Manasa, which is unfathomable (for its
depth), stainless, and pure, and which has Truth for its waters and the
understanding for its lake.[502] The fruits in the form of cleansing,
that one acquires by bathing in that Tirtha, are freedom from cupidity,
sincerity, truthfulness, mildness (of behaviour), compassion, abstention
from injuring any creature, self-restraint, and tranquillity. Those men
that are freed from attachments, that are divested of pride, that
transcend all pairs of opposites (such as pleasure and pain, praise and
blame, heat and cold, etc.), that have no spouses and children and houses
and gardens, etc., that are endued with purity, and that subsist upon the
alms given to them by others, are regarded as Tirthas. He who is
acquainted with the truths of all things and who is freed from the idea
of meum, is said to be the highest Tirtha.[503] In searching the
indications of purity, the gaze should ever be directed towards these
attributes (so that where these are present, thou mayst take purity to be
present, and where these are not, purity also should be concluded to be
not). Those persons from whose souls the attributes of Sattwa and Rajas
and Tamas have been washed off, they who, regardless of (external) purity
and impurity pursue the ends they have proposed to themselves, they who
have renounced everything, they who are possessed of omniscience and
endued with universal sight, and they who are of pure conduct, are
regarded as Tirthas possessing the power of cleansing. That man whose
limbs only are wet with water is not regarded as one that is washed. He,
on the other hand, is regarded as washed who has washed himself by
self-denial. Even such a person is said to be pure both inwardly and
outwardly. They who never concern themselves with what is past, they who
feel no attachment to acquisitions that are present, indeed, they who are
free from desire, are said to be possessed of the highest purity.
Knowledge is said to constitute the especial purity of the body. So also
freedom from desire, and cheerfulness of mind. Purity of conduct
constitutes the purity of the mind. The purity that one attains by
ablutions in sacred waters is regarded as inferior. Verily, that purity
which arises from knowledge, is regarded as the best. Those ablutions
which one performs with a blazing mind in the waters of the knowledge of
Brahma in the Tirtha called Manasa, are the true ablutions of those that
are conversant with Truth. That man who is possessed of true purity of
conduct and who is always devoted to the preservation of a proper
attitude towards all, indeed, he who is possessed of (pure) attributes
and merit, is regarded as truly pure. These that I have mentioned have
been said to be the Tirthas that inhere to the body. Do thou listen to me
as I tell thee what those sacred Tirthas are that are situate on the
earth also. Even as especial attributes that inhere to the body have been
said to be sacred, there are particular spots on earth as well, and
particular waters, that are regarded as sacred. By reciting the names of
the Tirthas, by performing ablutions there, and by offering oblations to
the Pitris in those places, one's sins are washed off. Verily, those men
whose sins are thus washed off succeed in attaining to heaven when they
leave this world. In consequence of their association with persons that
are righteous, through the especial efficacy of the earth itself of those
spots and of particular waters, there are certain portions of the earth
that have come to be regarded as sacred. The Tirthas of the mind are
separate and distinct from those of the earth. That person who bathes in
both attains to success without any delay. As strength without exertion,
or exertion without strength can never accomplish anything, singly, and
as these, when combined, can accomplish all things, even so one that
becomes endued with the purity that is contributed by the Tirthas in the
body as also by that which is contributed by the Tirthas on the earth,
becomes truly pure and attains to success. That purity which is derived
from both sources is the best.'"



SECTION CIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoveth thee, O grandsire, to tell me what are
the highest, the most beneficial, and the most certain fruit of all hinds
of fasts k this world.'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O king, to what was sung by the Self-born himself
and by accomplishing which a person, without doubt, attains to the
highest happiness. That man who fasts on the twelfth day of the moon in
the month called Margasirsha and worships Krishna as Kesava for the whole
day and night, attains to the merit of the Horse-sacrifice and becomes
cleansed of all his sins. He who; after the same manner, fasts on the
twelfth day of the moon in the month of Pausha and worships Krishna as
Narayana, for the whole day and night, attains to the merits of the
Vajapeya sacrifice and the highest success. He who fasts on the twelfth
day of the moon in the month of Magha and worships Krishna as Madhava,
for the whole day and night, attains to the merits of the Rajasuya
sacrifice, and rescues his own race (from misery).[504] He who fasts on
the twelfth day of the moon in the month of Phalguna and worships Krishna
as Govinda, for the whole day and night, attains to the merit of the
Atiratra sacrifice and goes to the region of Soma. He who fasts on the
twelfth day of the moon in the month of Chaitra and worship Krishna as
Vishnu, for the whole day and night, attains to the merit of the
Pundarika sacrifice and proceeds to the region of the deities. By
observing a similar fast on the twelfth day of the month of Vaisakha and
worshipping Krishna as the slayer of Madhu for the whole day and night,
one attains to the merits of the Agnishtoma sacrifice and proceeds to the
region of Soma. By observing a fast on the twelfth lunar day in the month
of Jyaishtha and worshipping Krishna as him who had (in Vali's sacrifice)
covered the universe with three steps of his, one attains to the merits
of the Gomedha sacrifice and sports with the Apsaras in great happiness.
By observing a fast on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of
Ashadha and worshipping Krishna as the dwarf (who beguiled the Asura king
Vali), one attains to the merits of the Naramedha[505] sacrifice and
sports in happiness with the Apsaras. By observing a fast for the twelfth
lunar day of the month Sravana and worshipping Krishna for day and night
as Sridhara, one attains to the merits of the sacrifice called
Panchayajna and acquires a beautiful car in Heaven whereon he sports in
joy. By observing a fast on the twelfth day of the moon in the month of
Bhadrapada and worshipping Krishna as Hrishikesa for the whole day and
night, one attains to the merits of the Sautramani sacrifice and becomes
cleansed of all sins. By observing a fast for the twelfth day of the moon
in the month of Aswin and worship-ping Krishna as Padmanabha, one attains
without doubt, to the merits of the sacrifice in which a thousand kine
are given away. By observing a fast for the twelfth day of the moon in
the month of Kartika and worshipping Krishna as Damodara, one attains,
without doubt, to the combined merits of all the sacrifices. He who, in
this way, adores Krishna for a whole year as Pundarikaksha, acquires the
power of recollecting the incidents of his past births and wins much
wealth in gold. Similarly, he who worships Krishna every day as Upendra
attains to identity with him. After Krishna has been worshipped in this
way, one should, at the conclusion of one's vow, feed a number of
Brahmanas or make gifts unto them of ghee. The illustrious Vishnu, that
ancient Being, has himself said that there is no fast that possesses
merits superior to what attach to fast of this kind.'"



SECTION CX

"Vaisampayana said, 'Approaching the Kuru grandsire, venerable in years,
viz., Bhishma, who was then lying on his bed of arrows, Yudhishthira
possessed of great wisdom put the following question.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'How, O grandsire, does one acquire beauty of form
and prosperity and agreeableness of disposition? How, indeed, does one
become possessed of religious merit and wealth and pleasure? How does one
become endued with happiness?'

"Bhishma said, 'In the month of Margasirsha, when the moon comes in
conjunction with the asterism called Mula, when his two feet are united
with that very asterism, O king, when Rohini is in his calf, when his
knee-joints are in Aswini, and his shins are in the two Ashadhas, when
Phalguni makes his anus, and Krittika his waist, when his navel is in
Bhadrapada, his ocular region in. Revati, and his back on the
Dhanishthas, when Anuradha makes his belly, when with his two arms he
reaches the Visakhas, when his two hands are indicated by Hasta, when
Punarvasu, O king, makes his fingers, Aslesha his nails, when Jyeshtha is
known for his neck, when by Sravana is pointed out his ears, and his
mouth by Pushya, when Swati is said to constitute his teeth and lips,
when Satabhisha is his smile and Magha his nose, when Mrigasiras is known
to be in his eye, and Chitra in his forehead, when his head is in
Bharani, when Ardra constitutes his hair, O king, the vow called
Chandravrata should be commenced. Upon the completion of that vow, gift
of ghee should be made unto Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas. As the
fruit of that vow, one becomes possessed about knowledge. Indeed, one
becomes, in consequence of such a vow, as full (of every blessed
attribute) as the moon himself when he is at full.'"



SECTION CXI

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, O thou that art possessed of great
wisdom and conversant with all the scriptures. I desire to know those
excellent ordinances in consequence of which mortal creatures have to
travel through their rounds of rebirth. What is that conduct by following
which, O king, men succeed in attaining to high heaven, and what is that
conduct by which one sinks in Hell? When, abandoning the dead body that
is as inert as a piece of wood or clod of earth, people proceed to the
other world, what are those that follow them thither?'

"Bhishma said, 'Yonder comes the illustrious Vrihaspati of great
intelligence! Do thou ask his blessed self. The subject is an eternal
mystery. None else is capable of explaining the matter. There is no
speaker like Vrihaspati.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'While the son of Pritha and the son of Ganga were
thus speaking with each other, there came to that spot from the firmament
the illustrious Vrihaspati of cleansed soul. King Yudhishthira, and all
others, with Dhritarashtra at their head, stood up and received
Vrihaspati with proper honours. Verily, the worship they offered to the
preceptor of the celestials was excellent. Then Dharma's royal son,
Yudhishthira, approaching the illustrious Vrihaspati, asked him the
question in proper form, desirous of knowing the truth.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O illustrious one, thou art conversant with all
duties and all the scriptures. Do thou tell me, what is truly the friend
of mortal creatures? Is the father, or mother, or son, or preceptor, or
kinsmen, or relatives, or those called friends, that may be said to truly
constitute the friend of a mortal creature? One goes to the next world,
leaving one's dead body that is like a piece of wood or a clod of earth.
Who is it that follows him thither?'

"Vrihaspati said, 'One is born alone, O king, and one dies alone; one
crosses alone the difficulties one meets with, and one alone encounters
whatever misery falls to one's lot. One has really no companion in these
acts. The father, the mother, the brother, the son, the preceptor,
kinsmen, relatives, and friends, leaving the dead body as if it were a
piece of wood or a clod of earth, after having mourned for only a moment,
all turn away from it and proceed to their own concerns. Only
Righteousness follows the body that is thus abandoned by them all. Hence,
it is plain, that Righteousness is the only friend and that Righteousness
only should be sought by all. One endued with righteousness would attain
to that high end which is constituted by heaven. If endued with
unrighteousness, he goes to Hell. Hence, the man of intelligence should
always seek to acquire religious merit through wealth won by lawful
means. Piety is the one only friend which creatures have in the world
hereafter. Let by cupidity, or stupefaction, or compassion, or fear, one
destitute of much knowledge is seen to do improper acts, for the sake of
even another, his judgment thus stupefied by cupidity.[506] Piety, wealth
and pleasure,--these three constitute the fruit of life. One should
acquire these three by means of being free from impropriety and sin.'

"Yudhishthira, said, 'I have carefully heard the words spoken by thy
illustrious self,--these words that are fraught with righteousness, and
that are highly beneficial. I wish now to know of the existence of the
body (after death).[507] The dead body of man becomes subtil and
unmanifest. It becomes invisible. How is it possible for piety to follow
it?'

"Vrihaspati said, 'Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, Light, Mind, Yama (the king
of the dead), Understanding, the Soul, as also Day and Night, all
together behold as witnesses the merits (and demerits) of all living
creatures. With these, Righteousness follows the creature (when
dead).[508] When the body becomes bereft of life, skin, bones, flesh, the
vital seed, and blood, O thou of great intelligence, leave it at the same
time. Endued with merit (and demerit) Jiva (after the destruction of this
body) attains to another. After the attainment by Jiva of that body, the
presiding deities of the five elements once more behold as witnesses all
his acts good and bad. What else dost thou wish to hear? If endued with
righteousness, Jiva enjoys happiness. What other topic, belonging to this
or the other world, shall I discourse upon?'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thy illustrious self has explained how Righteousness
follows Jiva. I desire to know how the vital seed is originated.'

"Vrihaspati said, 'The food that these deities, O king, who dwell in the
body, viz., Earth, Wind, Ether, Water, Light, and Mind eat, gratifies
them. When those five elements become gratified, O monarch, with Mind
numbering as their sixth, their vital seed then becomes generated, O thou
of cleansed soul! When an act of union takes place between male and
female, the vital seed flows out and causes conception. I have thus
explained to thee what thou hast asked. What else dost thou wish to hear?'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast, O illustrious one, said how conception
takes place. Do thou explain how the Jiva that takes birth grows (by
becoming possessed of body).'

"Vrihaspati said, 'As soon as Jiva enters the vital seed, he becomes
overwhelmed by the elements already mentioned. When Jiva becomes
disunited therewith, he is said to attain to the other end (viz., death).
Endued as Jiva becomes with all those elements, he attains, in
consequence thereof, a body. The deities, that preside over those
elements behold as witnesses all his acts, good and bad. What else dost
thou wish to hear?'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Leaving off skin and bone and flesh, and becoming
destitute of all those elements, in what does Jiva reside, O illustrious
one, for enjoying and enduring happiness and misery?'

"Vrihaspati said, 'Endued with all his acts, the Jiva quickly enters the
vital seed, and utilizing the functional flow of women, takes birth in
time, O Bharata. After birth, the Jiva receives woe and death from the
messengers of Yama. Indeed, misery and a painful round of rebirth are his
inheritance. Endued with life, O king, the Jiva in this world, from the
moment of his birth, enjoys and endures his own (previous) acts,
depending upon righteousness (and its reverse). If the Jiva, according to
the best of his power, follows righteousness from the day of his birth,
he then succeeds in enjoying, when reborn, happiness without
interruption. If, on the other hand, without following righteousness
without interruption, he acts sinfully, he reaps happiness at first as
the reward of his righteousness and endures misery after that. Endued
with unrighteousness, the Jiva has to go to the dominions of Yama and
suffering great misery there, he has to take birth in an intermediate
order of being,[509] Listen to me as I tell thee what the different acts
are by doing which the diva, stupefied by folly, has to take birth in
different orders of being, as declared in the Vedas, the scriptures, and
the (sacred) histories. Mortals have to go to the frightful regions of
Yama. In those regions, O king, there are places that are fraught with
every merit and that are worthy on that account of being the abodes of
the very deities. There are, again, places in those regions that are
worse than those which are inhabited by animals and birds. Indeed, there
are spots of these kinds in the abode of Yama which (so far as its
happier regions are concerned) is equal to the region of Brahman himself
in merits. Creatures, bound by their acts, endure diverse kinds of
misery. I shall, after this, tell thee what those acts and dispositions
are in consequence of which a person obtains to an end that is fraught
with great misery and terror. If a regenerate person, having studied the
four Vedas, becomes stupefied by folly and accepts a gift from a fallen
man, he has then to take birth in the asinine order. He has to live as an
ass for five and ten years. Casting off his asinine form, he has next to
take birth as an ox, in which state he has to live for seven years.
Casting off his bovine form, he has next to take birth as a Rakshasa of
regenerate order. Living as Rakshasa of the regenerate order for three
months, he then regains his status (in his next birth) of a
Brahmana.[510] A Brahmana, by officiating at the sacrifice of a fallen
person, has to take birth as a vile worm. In this form he has to live for
five and ten years, O Bharata. Freed from the status of a worm, be next
takes birth as an ass. As an ass he has to live for five years, and then
a hog, in which state also he has to remain for as many years. After
that, he takes birth as a cock, and living for five years in that form,
he takes birth as a jackal and lives for as many years in that state. He
has next to take birth as a dog, and living thus for a year he regains
his status of humanity. That foolish disciple who offends his preceptor
by doing any injury to him, has certainly to undergo three
transformations in this world. Such a person, O monarch, has in the first
instance to become a dog. He has then to become a beast of prey, and then
an ass. Living his asinine form, he has to wander for some time in great
affliction as a spirit. After the expiration of that period, he has to
take birth as a Brahmana. That sinful disciple who even in thought
commits adultery with the wife of his preceptor, has in consequence of
such a sinful heart, to undergo many fierce shapes in this world. First
taking birth in the canine order he has to live for three years. Casting
off the canine form when death comes, he takes birth as a worm or vile
vermin. In this form he has to live for a year. Leaving that form he
succeeds in regaining his status as a human being of the regenerate
order. If the preceptor kills, without reason, his disciple who is even
as a son to him, he has, in consequence of such a wilful act of sin on
his part, to take birth as a beast of prey. That son who disregards his
father and mother, O king, has to take birth, after leaving off his human
form as an animal of the asinine order. Assuming the asinine form he has
to live for ten years. After that he has to take birth as a crocodile, in
which form he has to live for a year. After that he regains the human
form. That son with whom his parents become angry, has, in consequence of
his evil thoughts towards them, to take birth as an ass. As an ass he has
to live for ten months. He has then to take birth as a dog and to remain
as such for four and ten months. After that he has to take birth as a cat
and living in that form for seven months he regains his status of
humanity. Having spoken ill of parents, one has to take birth as a
Sarika. Striking them, one has to take birth, O king, as tortoise. Living
as a tortoise for ten years, he has next to take birth as a porcupine.
After that he has to take birth as a snake, and living for six months in
that form he regains the status of humanity. That man who, while
subsisting upon the food that his royal master supplies, commits acts
that are injurious to the interests of his master,--that man, thus
stupefied by folly, has after death to take birth as an ape. For ten
years he has to live as an ape, and after that for five years as a mouse.
After that he has to become a dog, and living in that form for a period
of six months he succeeds in regaining his status of humanity. That man
who misappropriates what is deposited with him in trustfulness has to
undergo a hundred transformations. He at last takes birth as a vile worm.
In that order he has to live for a period of ten and five years, O
Bharata. Upon the exhaustion of his great demerit in this way, he
succeeds in regaining his status of humanity. That man who harbours
malice towards others has, after death, to take birth as a Sarngaka. That
man of wicked understanding who becomes guilty of breach of trust has to
take birth as a fish. Living as a fish for eight years, he takes birth, O
Bharata, as a deer. Living as a deer for four months, he has next to take
birth as a goat. After the expiration of a full year he casts off his
goatish body, he takes birth then as a worm. After that he succeeds in
regaining his status of humanity. That shameless insensate man who,
through stupefaction, steals paddy, barley, sesame, Masha, Kulattha,
oil-seeds, oats, Kalaya, Mudga, wheat, Atasi, and other kinds of corn,
has to take birth as a mouse[511]. After leading the life for some time
he has to take birth as a hog. As soon as he takes birth as a hog he has
to die of disease. In consequence of his sin, that foolish man has next
to take birth as a dog, O king. Living as a dog for five years, he then
regains his status of humanity. Having committed an act of adultery with
the spouse of another man, one has to take birth as a wolf. After that he
has to assume the forms of a dog and jackal and vulture. He has next to
take birth as a snake and then as a Kanka and then as a crane.[512] That
man of sinful soul who, stupefied by folly, commits an act of sexual
congress with the spouse of a brother, has to take birth as a male Kokila
and to live in that form for a whole year, O king. He who, through lust,
commits an act of sexual congress with the wife of a friend, or the wife
of preceptor, or the wife of his king, has, after death, to take the form
of a hog. He has to live in his porcine form for five years and then to
assume that of a wolf for ten years. For the next five years he has to
assume that of a wolf for ten years. For the next five years he has to
live as a cat and then for the next ten years as a cock. He has next to
live for three months as an ant, and then as a worm for a month. Having
undergone these transformations he has next to live as a vile worm for
four and ten years. When his sin becomes exhausted by such chastisement,
he at last regains the status of humanity. When a wedding is about to
take place, or a sacrifice, or an act of gifts is about to be made, O
thou of great puissance, the man who offers any obstruction, has to take
birth in his next life as a vile worm, Assuming such a form he has to
live, O Bharata, for five and ten years. When his demerit is exhausted by
such suffering, he regains the status of humanity. Having once bestowed
his daughter in marriage upon a person, he who seeks to bestow her again
upon a second husband, has, O king, to take birth among vile worms.
Assuming such a form, O Yudhisthira, he has to live for a period of three
and ten years. Upon the exhaustion of his demerit by such sufferance, he
regains the status of humanity. He who eats without having performed the
rites in honour of the deities or those in honour of the Pitris or
without having offered (even) oblations of water to both the Rishis and
the Pitris, has to take birth as a crow. Living as a crow for a hundred
years he next assumes the form of a cock. His next transformation is that
of a snake for a month. After this, he regains the status of humanity. He
who disregards his eldest brother who is even like a sire, has, after
death, to take birth in the order of cranes. Having assumed that form he
has to live in it for two years. Casting off that form at the conclusion
of that period, he regains the status of humanity. That Sudra who has
sexual intercourse with a Brahmana woman, has, after death, to take birth
as a hog. As soon as he takes birth in the porcine order he dies of
disease, O king. The wretch has next to take birth as a dog. O king, in
consequence of his dire act of sin. Casting off his canine form he
regains upon the exhaustion of his demerit, the status of humanity. The
Sudra who begets offspring upon a Brahmana woman, leaving off his human
form, becomes reborn as a mouse. The man who becomes guilty of
ingratitude O king, has to go to the regions of Yama and there to undergo
very painful and severe treatment at the hands of the messengers,
provoked to fury, of the grim king of the dead. Clubs with heavy hammers
and mallets, sharp-pointed lances, heated jars, all fraught with severe
pain, frightful forests of sword-blades, heated sands, thorny
Salmalis--these and many other instruments of the most painful torture
such a man has to endure in the regions of Yama, O Bharata! The
ungrateful person, O chief of Bharata's race, having endured such
terrible treatment in the regions of the grim king of the dead, has to
come back to this world and take birth among vile vermin.[513] He has to
live as a vile vermin for a period of five and ten years. O Bharata, He
has then to enter the womb and die prematurely before birth. After this,
that person has to enter the womb a hundred times in succession. Indeed,
having, undergone a hundred rebirths, he at last becomes born as a
creature in some intermediate order between man and inanimate nature.
Having endured misery for a great many years, he has to take birth as a
hairless tortoise. A person that steals curds has to take birth as a
crane. One becomes a monkey by stealing raw fish. That man of
intelligence who steals honey has to take birth as a gadfly. By stealing
fruits or roots or cakes one becomes an ant. By stealing Nishpava one
becomes a Halagolaka.[514] By stealing Payasa one becomes in one's next
birth a Tittiri bird. By stealing cakes one becomes a screech-owl. That
man of little intelligence who steals iron has to take birth as a cow.
That man of little understanding who steals white brass has to take birth
as a bird of the Harita species. By stealing a vessel of silver one
becomes a pigeon. By stealing a vessel of gold one has to take birth as a
vile vermin. By stealing a piece of silken cloth, one becomes a Krikara.
By stealing a piece of cloth made of red silk, one becomes a
Vartaka.[515] By stealing a piece of muslin one becomes a parrot. By
stealing a piece of cloth that is of fine texture, one becomes a duck
after casting off one's human body. By stealing a piece of cloth made of
cotton, one becomes a crane. By stealing a piece of cloth made of jute,
one becomes a sheep in one's next life. By stealing a piece of linen, one
has to take birth as a hare. By stealing different kinds of colouring
matter one has to take birth as a peacock. By stealing a piece of red
cloth one has to take birth as a bird of the Jivajivaka species. By
stealing unguents (such as sandal-paste) and perfumes in this world, the
man possessed of cupidity, O king, has to take birth as a mole. Assuming
the form of a mole one has to live in it for a period of five and ten
years. After the exhaustion of his demerit by such sufferings he regains
the status of humanity. By stealing milk, one becomes a crane. That man,
O king, who through stupefaction of the understanding, steals oil, has to
take birth, after casting off this body, as an animal that subsists upon
oil as his form.[516] That wretch who himself well armed, slays another
while that other is unarmed, from motives of obtaining his victim's
wealth or from feelings of hostility, has, after casting off his human
body, to take birth as an ass. Assuming that asinine form he has to live
for a period of two years and then he meets with death at the edge of a
weapon. Casting off in this way his asinine body he has to take birth in
his next life as a deer always filled with anxiety (at the thought of
foes that may kill him). Upon the expiration of a year from the time of
his birth as a deer, he has to yield up his life at the point of a
weapon. Thus casting off his form of a deer, he next takes birth as a
fish and dies in consequence of being dragged up in net, on the
expiration of the fourth month. He has next to take birth as a beast of
prey. For ten years he has to live in that form, and then he takes birth
as a pard in which form he has to live for a period of five years.
Impelled by the change that is brought about by time, he then casts off
that form, and his demerit having been exhausted he regains the status of
humanity. That man of little understanding who kills a woman has to go
the regions of Yama and to endure diverse kinds of pain and misery. He
then has to pass through full one and twenty transformations. After that,
O monarch, he has to take birth as a vile vermin. Living as a vermin for
twenty years, he regains the status of humanity. By stealing food, one
has to take birth as a bee. Living for many months in the company of
other bees, his demerit becomes exhausted and he regains the status of
humanity. By stealing paddy, one becomes a cat. That man who steals food
mixed with sesame cakes has in his next birth to assume the form of a
mouse large or small according to the largeness or smallness of the
quantity stolen. He bites human beings every day and as the consequence
thereof becomes sinful and travels through a varied round of rebirths.
That man of foolish understanding who steals ghee has to take birth as a
gallinule. That wicked person who steals fish has to take birth as a
crow. By stealing salt one has to take birth as a mimicking bird. That
man who misappropriates what is deposited with him through confidence,
has to sustain a diminution in the period of his life, and after death
has to take birth among fishes. Having lived for some time as a fish he
dies and regains the human form. Regaining, however, the status of
humanity, he becomes short-lived. Indeed, having committed sins, O
Bharata, one has to take birth in an order intermediate between that of
humanity and vegetables. Those people are entirely unacquainted with
righteousness which has their own hearts for its authority. Those men
that commit diverse acts of sin and then seek to expiate them by
continuous vows and observances of piety, become endued with both
happiness and misery and live in great anxiety of heart.[517] Those men
that are of sinful conduct and that yield to the influence of cupidity
and stupefaction, without doubt, take birth as Mlechchhas that do not
deserve to be associated with. Those men on the other hand, who abstain
from sin all their lives, become free from disease of every kind, endued
with beauty of form and possessed of wealth. Women also, when they act in
the way indicated, attain to births of the same kind. Indeed, they have
to take births as the spouses of the animals I have indicated. I have
told thee all the faults that relate to the appropriation of what belongs
to others. I have discoursed to thee very briefly on the subject, O
sinless one. In connection with some other subject, O Bharata, thou shalt
again hear of those faults. I heard all this, O king, in days of old,
from Brahman himself, and I asked all about it in a becoming way, when he
discoursed on it in the midst of the celestial Rishis. I have told thee
truly and in detail all that thou hadst asked me. Having listened to all
this, O monarch, do thou always set thy heart on righteousness.'"



SECTION CXII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast told me, O regenerate one, what the end is
of unrighteousness or sin. I desire now to hear, O foremost of speakers,
of what the end is of Righteousness. Having committed diverse acts of
sin, by what acts of people succeed in attaining to an auspicious end in
this world? By what acts also do people attain to an auspicious end in
heaven?'

"Vrihaspati said, 'By committing sinful acts with perverted mind, one
yields to the sway of unrighteousness and as a consequence goeth to hell.
That man who, having perpetrated sinful acts through stupefaction of
mind, feels the pangs of repentance and sets his heart on contemplation
(of the deity), has not to endure the consequences of his sins. One
becomes freed from one's sins in proportion as one repents for them. If
one having committed a sin, O king, proclaims it in the presence of
Brahmanas conversant with duties, one becomes quickly cleansed from the
obloquy arising from one's sin. Accordingly as one becomes cleansed
therefrom fully or otherwise, like a snake freed from his diseased
slough. By making, with a concentrated mind, gifts of diverse kinds unto
a Brahmana, and concentrating the mind (on the deity), one attains to an
auspicious end. I shall now tell thee what those gifts are, O
Yudhisthira, by making which a person, even if guilty of having committed
sinful acts, may become endued with merit. Of all kinds of gifts, that of
food is regarded as the best. One desirous of attaining to merit should,
with a sincere heart, make gifts of food. Food is the life-breath of men.
From it all creatures are born. All the worlds of living creatures are
established upon food. Hence food is applauded. The deities, Rishis,
Pitris, and men, all praise food. King Rantideva, in days of old,
proceeded to Heaven by making gifts of food. Food that is good and that
has been acquired lawfully, should be given, with a cheerful heart, unto
such Brahmanas as are possessed of Vedic lore. That man has never to take
birth in an intermediate order, whose food, given with a cheerful heart
is taken by a thousand Brahmanas. A person, O chief of men, by feeding
ten thousand Brahmanas, becomes cleansed of the piety and devoted to Yoga
practices. A Brahmana conversant with the Vedas, by giving away food
acquired by him as alms, unto a Brahmana devoted to the study of the
Vedas, succeeds in attaining to happiness here. That Kshatriya who,
without taking anything that belongs to a Brahmana, protects his subjects
lawfully, and makes gifts of food, obtained by the exercise of his
strength, unto Brahmanas foremost in Vedic knowledge, with concentrated
heart, succeeds by such conduct, O thou of righteous soul, in cleansing
himself, O son of Pandu, of all his sinful acts. That Vaisya who divides
the produce of his fields into six equal shares and makes a gift of one
of those shares unto Brahmanas, succeeds by such conduct in cleansing
himself from every sin. That Sudra who, earning food by hard labour and
at the risk of life itself, makes a gift of it to Brahmanas, becomes
cleansed from every sin. That man who, by putting forth his physical
strength, earns food without doing any act of injury to any creature, and
makes gift of it unto Brahmanas succeeds in avoiding all calamities. A
person by cheerfully making gifts of food acquired by lawful means unto
Brahmanas pre-eminent for Vedic lore, becomes cleansed of all his sins.
By treading in the path of the righteous one becomes freed from all sins.
A person by making gifts of such food as is productive of great energy,
becomes himself possessed of great energy. The path made by charitable
persons is always trod by those that are endued with wisdom. They that
make gifts of food are regarded as givers of life. The merit they acquire
by such gifts is eternal. Hence, a person should, under all
circumstances, seek to earn food by lawful means, and having earned to
make always gifts of it unto deserving men. Food is the great refuge of
the world of living creatures. By making gifts of food, one has never to
go to hell. Hence, one should always make gifts of food, having earned it
by lawful means. The householder should always seek to eat after having
made a gift of food unto a Brahmana. Every man should make the day
fruitful by making gifts of food.[518] A person by feeding, O king, a
thousand Brahmanas all of whom are conversant with duties and the
scriptures and the sacred histories, has not to go to Hell and to return
to this world for undergoing rebirths. Endued with the fruition of every
wish, he enjoys great felicity hereafter. Possessed of such merit, he
sports in happiness, freed from every anxiety, possessed of beauty of
form and great fame and endued with wealth. I have thus told thee all
about the high merit of gifts of food. Even this is the root of all
righteousness and merit, as also of all gifts, O Bharata!'"



SECTION CXIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Abstention from injury, the observance of the Vedic
ritual, meditation, subjugation of the senses, penances, and obedient
services rendered to the preceptors,--which amongst these is fraught with
the greatest merit with respect to a person?'

"Vrihaspati said, All these six are fraught with merit. They are
different doors of piety. I shall discourse upon them presently. Do thou
listen to them, O chief of the Bharatas! I shall tell thee what
constitutes the highest good of a human being. That man who practises the
religion of universal compassion achieves his highest good. That man who
keeps under control the three faults, viz., lust, wrath, and cupidity, by
throwing them upon all creatures (and practises the virtue of
compassion), attains to success[519]. He who, from motives of his own
happiness, slays other harmless creatures with the rod of chastisement,
never attains to happiness, in the next world. That man who regards all
creatures as his own self, and behaves towards them as towards his own
self, laying aside the rod of chastisement and completely subjugating his
wrath, succeeds in attaining to happiness. The very deities, who are
desirous of a fixed abode, become stupefied in ascertaining the track of
that person who constitutes himself the soul of all creatures and looks
upon them all as his own self, for such a person leaves no track
behind.[520] One should never do that to another which one regards as
injurious to one's own self. This, in brief, is the rule of
Righteousness. One by acting in a different way by yielding to desire,
becomes guilty of unrighteousness. In refusals and gifts, in happiness
and misery, in the agreeable, and the disagreeable, one should judge of
their effects by a reference to one's own self.[521] When One injures
another, the injured turns round and injures the injurer. Similarly, when
one cherishes another, that other cherishes the cherisher. One should
frame one's rule of conduct according to this. I have told thee what
Righteousness is even by this subtile way.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'The preceptor of the deities, possessed of
great intelligence, having said this unto king Yudhishthira the just,
ascended upwards for proceeding to Heaven, before our eyes.'"



SECTION CXIV

"Vaisampayana said, 'After this, king Yudhishthira, endued with great
energy, and the foremost of eloquent men, addressed his grandsire lying
on his bed of arrows, in the following words.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou of great intelligence, the Rishis and
Brahmanas and the deities, led by the authority of the Vedas, all applaud
that religion which has compassion for its indication. But, O king, whet
I ask thee is this: how does a man, who has perpetrated acts of injury to
others in word, thought and deed, succeed in cleansing himself from
misery?'

"Bhishma said, 'Utterers of Brahma have said that there are four kinds of
compassion or abstention from injury. If even one of those four kinds be
not observed, the religion of compassion, it is said, is not observed. As
all four-footed animals are incapable of standing on three legs, even so
the religion of compassion cannot stand if any of those four divisions or
parts be wanting. As the footprints of all other animals are engulfed in
those of the elephant, even so all other religions are said to be
comprehended in that of compassion. A person becomes guilty of injury
through acts, words and thoughts[522]. Discarding it mentally at the
outset, one should next discard in word and thought. He who, according to
this rule, abstains from eating meat is said to be cleansed in a
threefold way. It is heard that utterers of Brahma ascribe to three
causes (the sin of eating meat). That sin may attach to the mind, to
words, and to acts. It is for this reason that men of wisdom who are
endued with penances refrain from eating meat. Listen to me, O king, as I
tell thee what the faults are that attach to the eating of meat. The meat
of other animals is like the flesh of one's son. That foolish person,
stupefied by folly, who eats meat is regarded as the vilest of human
beings. The union of father and mother produces an offspring. After the
same manner, the cruelty that a helpless and sinful wretch commits,
produces its progeny of repeated rebirths fraught with great misery. As
the tongue is the cause of the knowledge or sensation of taste, so the
scriptures declare, attachment proceeds from taste.[523] Well-dressed,
cooked with salt or without salt, meat, in whatever form one may take it,
gradually attracts the mind and enslaves it. How will those foolish men
that subsist upon meat succeed in listening to the sweet music of
(celestial) drums and cymbals and lyres and harps? They who eat meat
applaud it highly, suffering themselves to be stupefied by its taste
which they pronounce to be something inconceivable, undescribable, and
unimaginable. Such praise even of meat is fraught with demerit. In former
days, many righteous men, by giving the flesh of their own bodies,
protected the flesh of other creatures and as a consequence of such acts
of merit, have proceeded to heaven. In this way, O monarch the religion
of compassion is surrounded by four considerations. I have thus declared
to thee that religion which comprises all other religions within it.'"



SECTION CXV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast told it many times that abstention from
injury is the highest religion. In Sraddhas, however, that are performed
in honour of the Pitris, persons for their own good should make offerings
of diverse kinds of meat. Thou hast said so while discoursing formerly
upon the ordinances in respect of Sraddhas. How can meat, however, be
procured without slaying a living creature? Thy declarations, therefore,
seem to me to be contradictory. A doubt has, therefore, arisen in our
mind respecting the duty of abstaining from meat. What are the faults
that one incurs by eating meat, and what are the merits that one wins?
What are the demerits of him who eats meat by himself killing a living
creature? What are the merits of him who eats the meat of animals killed
by others? What the merits and demerits of him who kills a living
creature for another? Or of him who eats meat buying it of others? I
desire, O sinless one, that thou shouldst discourse to me on this topic
in detail. I desire to ascertain this eternal religion with certainty.
How does one attain to longevity? How does one acquire strength? How does
one attain to faultlessness of limbs? Indeed, how does one become endued
with excellent indications?

"Bhishma said, 'Listen to me, O, scion of Kuru's race, what the merit is
that attaches to abstention from meat. Listen to me as I declare to thee
what the excellent ordinances, in truth, are on this head. Those
high-souled persons who desire beauty, faultlessness of limbs, long life,
understanding, mental and physical strength, and memory, should abstain
from acts of injury. On this topic, O scion of Kuru's race, innumerable
discourses took place between the Rishis. Listen, O Yudhishthira, what
their opinion was. The merit acquired by that person, O Yudhishthira,
who, with the steadiness of a vow, adores the deities every month in
horse-sacrifices, is equal to his who discards honey and meat. The seven
celestial Rishis, the Valakhilyas, and those Rishis who drink the rays of
the sun, endued with great wisdom, applaud abstention from meat. The
Self-born Manu has said that that man who does not eat meat, or who does
not slay living creatures, or who does not cause them to be slain, is a
friend of all creatures. Such a man is incapable of being oppressed by
any creature. He enjoys the confidence of all living beings. He always
enjoys, besides, the approbation and commendation of the righteous. The
righteous-souled Narada has said that that man who wishes to increase his
own flesh by eating the flesh of other creatures, meets with calamity.
Vrihaspati has said that that man who abstains from honey and meat
acquires the merit of gifts and sacrifices and penances. In my
estimation, these two persons are equal, viz., he who adores the deities
every month in a horse-sacrifice for a space of hundred years and he who
abstains from honey and meat. In consequence of abstention from meat one
comes to be regarded as one who always adores the deities in sacrifices,
or as one who always makes gifts to others, or as one who always
undergoes the severest austerities. That man who having eaten meat gives
it up afterwards, acquires merit by such an act that is so great that a
study of all the Vedas or a performance, O Bharata, of all the
sacrifices, cannot bestow its like. It is exceedingly difficult to give
up meat after one has become acquainted with its taste. Indeed, it is
exceedingly difficult for such a person to observe the high vow of
abstention from meat, a vow that assures every creature by dispelling all
fear. That learned person who giveth to all living creatures the Dakshina
of complete assurance comes to be regarded, without doubt, as the giver
of life-breaths in this world.[524] Even this is the high religion which
men of wisdom applaud. The life-breaths of other creatures are as dear to
them as those of one's to one's own self. Men endued with intelligence
and cleansed souls should always behave towards other creatures after the
manner of that behaviour which they like others to observe towards
themselves. It is seen that even those men who are possessed of learning
and who seek to achieve the highest good in the form of Emancipation, are
not free from the fear of death. What need there be said of those
innocent and healthy creatures endued with love of life, when they are
sought to be slain by sinful wretches subsisting by slaughter? For this
reason, O monarch, know that the discarding of meat is the highest refuge
of religion, of heaven, and of happiness. Abstention from injury is the
highest religion. It is, again, the highest penance. It is also the
highest truths from which all duty proceeds. Flesh cannot be had from
grass or wood or stone. Unless a living creature is slain, it cannot be
had. Hence is the fault in eating flesh. The deities who subsist upon
Swaha, Swadha, and nectar, are devoted to truth and sincerity. Those
persons, however, who are for gratifying the sensation of taste, should
be known as Rakshasas wedded to the attribute of Passion. That man who
abstains from meat, is never put in fear, O king, by any creature,
wherever he may be, viz., in terrible wildernesses or inaccessible
fastnesses, by day or by night, or at the two twilights, in the open
squares of towns or in assemblies of men, from upraised weapons or in
places where there is great fright from wild animals or snakes. All
creatures seek his protection. He is an object of confidence with all
creatures. He never causes any anxiety in others, and himself has never
to become anxious. If there were nobody who ate flesh there would then be
nobody to kill living creatures. The man who kills living creatures kill
them for the sake of the person who eats flesh. If flesh were regarded as
inedible, there would then be no slaughter of living creatures. It is for
the sake of the eater that the slaughter of living creatures goes on in
the world. Since, O thou of great splendour, the period of life is
shortened of persons who slaughter living creatures or cause them to be
slaughtered, it is clear that the person who wishes his own good should
give up meat entirely. Those fierce persons who are engaged in slaughter
of living creatures, never find protectors when they are in need. Such
persons should always be molested and persecuted even as beasts of prey.
Through cupidity or stupefaction of the understanding, for the sake of
strength and energy, or through association with the sinful, the
disposition manifests itself in men for sinning. That man who seeks to
increase his own flesh by (eating) the flesh of others, has to live in
this world in great anxiety and after death has to take birth in
indifferent races and families. High Rishis devoted to the observance of
vows and self-restraint have said that abstention from meat is worthy of
every praise, productive of fame and Heaven, and a great propitiation by
itself. This I heard in days of old, O son of Kunti, from Markandeya when
that Rishi discoursed on the demerits of eating flesh. He who eats the
flesh of animals that are desirous of living but that have been killed by
either himself or others, incurs the sin that attaches to the slaughter
for his this act of cruelty. He who purchases flesh slays living
creatures through his wealth. He who eats flesh slays living creatures
through such act of eating. He who binds or seizes and actually kills
living creatures is the slaughterer. Those are the three kinds of
slaughter, each of these three acts being so. He who does not himself eat
flesh but approves of an act of slaughter becomes stained with the sin of
slaughter. By abstaining from meat and showing compassion to all
creatures one becomes incapable of being molested by any creature, and
acquires a long life, perfect health, and happiness. The merit that is
acquired by a person by abstaining from meat, we have heard, is superior
to that of one who makes presents of gold, of kine, and of land. One
should never eat meat of animals not dedicated in sacrifices and that
are, therefore, slain for nothing, and that has not been offered to the
gods and Pitris with the aid of the ordinances. There is not the
slightest doubt that a person by eating such meat goes to Hell. If one
eats the meat that has been sanctified in consequence of its having been
procured from animals dedicated in sacrifices and that have been slain
for the purpose of feeding Brahmanas, one incurs a little fault. By
behaving otherwise, one becomes stained with sin. That wretch among men
who slays living creatures for the sake of those who would eat them,
incurs great demerit. The eater's demerit is not so great. That wretch
among men who, following the path of religious rites and sacrifices laid
down in the Vedas, would kill a living creature from desire of eating its
flesh, would certainly become a resident of hell. That man who having
eaten flesh abstains from it afterwards, attains to great merit in
consequence of such abstention from sin. He who arranges for obtaining
flesh, he who approves of those arrangements, he who slays, he who buys
or sells, he who cooks, and he who eats, are all regarded as eaters of
flesh. I shall now cite another authority, depending upon that was
declared by the ordainer himself, and established in the Vedas. It has
been said that that religion which has acts for its indications has been
ordained for householders, O chief of kings, and not for those men who
are desirous of emancipation. Mann himself has said that meat which is
sanctified with mantras and properly dedicated, according to the
ordinances of the Vedas, in rites performed in honour of the Pitris, is
pure. All other meat falls under the class of what is obtained by useless
slaughter, and is, therefore, uneatable, and leads to Hell and infamy.
One should never eat, O chief of Bharata's race, like a Rakshasa, any
meat that has been obtained by means not sanctioned by the ordinance.
Indeed, one should never eat flesh obtained from useless slaughter and
that has not been sanctified by the ordinance. That man who wishes to
avoid calamity of every kind should abstain from the meat of every living
creature. It is heard that in the ancient Kalpa, persons, desirous of
attaining to regions of merit hereafter, performed sacrifices with seeds,
regarding such animals as dedicated by them. Filled with doubts
respecting the propriety of eating flesh, the Rishis asked Vasu the ruler
of the Chedis for solving them. King Vasu, knowing that flesh is
inedible, answered that is was edible, O monarch. From that moment Vasu
fell down from the firmament on the earth. After this he once more
repeated his opinion, with the result that he had to sink below the earth
for it. Desirous of benefiting all men, the high-souled Agastya, by the
aid of his penances, dedicated, once for all, all wild animals of the
deer species to the deities. Hence, there is no longer any necessity of
sanctifying those animals for offering them to the deities and the
Pitris. Served with flesh according to the ordinance, the Pitris become
gratified. Listen to me, O king of kings, as I tell thee this, O sinless
one. There is complete happiness in abstaining from meat, O monarch. He
that undergoes severe austerities for a hundred years and he that
abstains from meat, are both equal in point of merit. Even this is my
opinion, In the lighted fortnight of the month of Karttika in especial,
one should abstain from honey and meat. In this, it has been ordained,
there is great merit. He who abstains from meat for the four months of
the rains acquires the four valued blessings of achievements, longevity,
fame and might. He who abstains for the whole month of Karttika from meat
of every kind, transcends all kinds of woe and lives in complete
happiness. They who abstain from flesh by either months or fortnights at
a stretch have the region of Brahma ordained for them in consequence of
their abstention from cruelty. Many kings in ancient days, O son of
Pritha, who had constituted themselves the souls of all creatures and who
were conversant with the truths of all things, viz., Soul and Not-soul,
had abstained from flesh either for the whole of the month of Karttika or
for the whole of the lighted fortnight in that month. They were Nabhaga
and Amvarisha and the high-souled Gaya and Ayu and Anaranya and Dilipa
and Raghu and Puru and Kartavirya and Aniruddha and Nahusha and Yayati
and Nrigas and Vishwaksena and Sasavindu and Yuvanaswa and Sivi, the son
of Usinara, and Muchukunda and Mandhatri, and Harischandra. Do thou
always speak the truth. Never speak an untruth. Truth is an eternal duty.
It is by truth that Harischandra roves through heaven like a second
Chandramas. These other kings also, viz., Syenachitra, O monarch, and
Somaka and Vrika and Raivata and Rantideva and Vasu and Srinjaya, and
Dushmanta and Karushma and Rama and Alarka and Nala, and Virupaswa and
Nimi and Janaka of great intelligence, and Aila and Prithu and Virasena,
and Ikshvaku, and Sambhu, and Sweta, and Sagara, and Aja and Dhundhu and
Suvahu, and Haryaswa and Kshupa and Bharata, O monarch, did not eat flesh
for the month of Karttika and as the consequence thereof attained to
heaven, and endued with prosperity, blazed forth with effulgence in the
region of Brahman, adored by Gandharvas and surrounded by thousand
damsels of great beauty. Those high-souled men who practise this
excellent religion which is characterised by abstention from injury
succeed in attaining to a residence in heaven. These righteous men who,
from the time of birth, abstain from honey and meat and wine, are
regarded as Munis. That man who practises this religion consisting of
abstention from meat or who recites it for causing others to hear it,
will never have to go to hell even if he be exceedingly wicked in conduct
in other respects. He, O king, who (often-times) reads these ordinances
about abstention from meat, that are sacred and adored by the Rishis, or
hears it read, becomes cleansed of every sin and attains to great
felicity in consequence of the fruition of every wish. Without doubt, he
attains also to a position of eminence among kinsmen. When afflicted with
calamity, he readily transcends it. When obstructed with impediments, he
succeeds in freeing himself from them with the utmost ease. When ill with
disease, he becomes cured speedily, and afflicted with sorrow he becomes
liberated from it with greatest ease. Such a man has never to take birth
in the intermediate order of animals or birds. Born in the order of
humanity, he attains to great beauty of person. Endued with great
prosperity, O chief of Kuru's race, he acquires great fame as well. I
have thus told thee, O king, all that should be said on the subject of
abstention from meat, together with the ordinances respecting both the
religion of Pravritti and Nivritti as framed by the Rishis."



SECTION CXVI



"Yudhishthira said, 'Alas, those cruel men, who, discarding diverse kinds
of food, covet only flesh, are really like great Rakshasas! Alas, they do
not relish diverse kinds of cakes and diverse sorts of potherbs and
various species of Khanda with juicy flavour so much as they do flesh! My
understanding, for this reason, becomes stupefied in this matter. I
think, when such is the case, that, there is nothing which can compare
with flesh in the matter of taste, I desire, therefore, O puissant one,
to hear what the merits are of abstention from flesh, and the demerits
that attach to the eating of flesh, O chief of Bharata's race. Thou art
conversant with every duty. Do thou discourse to me in full agreeably to
the ordinances on duty, on this subject. Do tell me what, indeed, is
edible and what inedible. Tell me, O grandsire, what is flesh, of what
substances it is, the merits that attach to abstention from it, and what
the demerits are that attach to the eating of flesh.'

"Bhishma said, 'It is even so, O mighty-armed one, as thou sayest. There
is nothing on earth that is superior to flesh in point of taste. There is
nothing that is more beneficial then flesh to persons that are lean, or
weak, or afflicted with disease, or addicted to sexual congress or
exhausted with travel. Flesh speedily increases strength. It produces
great development. There is no food, O scorcher of foes, that is superior
to flesh. But, O delighter of the Kurus, the merits are great that attach
to men that abstain from it. Listen to me as I discourse to thee on it.
That man who wished to increase his own flesh by the flesh of another
living creature is such that there is none meaner and more cruel than he.
In this world there is nothing that is dearer to a creature than his
life. Hence (instead of taking that valuable possession), one should show
compassion to the lives of others as one does to one's own life. Without
doubt, O son, flesh has its origin in the vital seed. There is great
demerit attaching to its eating, as, indeed, there is merit in abstaining
from it. One does not, however, incur any fault by eating flesh
sanctified according to the ordinances of the Vedas. The audition is
heard that animals were created for sacrifice. They who eat flesh in any
other way are said to follow the Rakshasa practice. Listen to me as I
tell thee what the ordinance is that has been laid down for the
Kshatriyas. They do not incur any fault by eating flesh that has been
acquired by expenditure of prowess. All deer of the wilderness were
dedicated to the deities and the Pitris in days of old, O king, by
Agastya. Hence, the hunting of deer is not censured. There can be no
hunting without risk of one's own life. There is equality of risk between
the slayer and the slain. Either the animal is killed or it kills the
hunter. Hence, O Bharata, even royal sages betake themselves to the
practice of hunting. By such conduct they do not become stained with sin.
Indeed, the practice is not regarded as sinful. There is nothing, O
delighter of the Kurus, that is equal in point of merit, either here or
hereafter, to the practice of compassion to all living creatures. The man
of compassion has no fear. Those harmless men that are endued with
compassion have both this world and the next. Persons conversant with
duty say that that Religion is worthy of being called Religion which has
abstention from cruelty for its indication. The man of cleansed soul
should do only such acts as have compassion for their soul. That flesh
which is dedicated in sacrifices performed in honour of the deities and
the Pitris is called Havi (and, as such, is worthy of being eaten). That
man who is devoted to compassion and who behaves with compassion towards
others, has no fear to entertain from any creature. It is heard that all
creatures abstain from causing any fear unto such a creature. Whether he
is wounded or fallen down or prostrated or weakened or bruised, in
whatever state he may be, all creatures protect him. Indeed, they do so,
under all circumstances, whether he is on even or uneven ground. Neither
snakes nor wild animals, neither Pisachas nor Rakshasas, ever slay him.
When circumstances of fear arise, he becomes freed from fear who frees
others from situations of fear. There has never been, nor will there ever
be, a gift that is superior to the gift of life. It is certain that there
is nothing dearer to oneself than one's life. Death, O Bharata, is a
calamity or evil unto all creatures. When the time comes for Death, a
trembling of the whole frame is seen in all creatures. Enduring birth in
the uterus, decrepitude and afflictions of diverse kinds, in this ocean
of the world, living creatures may be seen to be continually going
forward and coming back. Every creature is afflicted by death. While
dwelling in the uterus, all creatures are cooked in the fluid juices,
that are alkaline and sour and bitter, of urine and phlegm and
faeces,--juices that produce painful sensations and are difficult to
bear. There in the uterus, they have to dwell in a state of helplessness
and are even repeatedly torn and pierced. They that are covetous of meat
are seen to be repeatedly cooked in the uterus in such a state of
helplessness. Attaining to diverse kinds of birth, they are cooked in the
hell called Kumbhipaka. They are assailed and slain, and in this way have
to travel repeatedly. There is nothing so dear to one as one's life when
one comes to this world. Hence, a person of cleansed soul should be
compassionate to all living creatures. That man, O king, who abstains
from every kind of meat from his birth, without doubt, acquires a large
space in Heaven, They who eat the flesh of animals who are desirous of
life, are themselves eaten by the animals they eat, without doubt. Even
this is my opinion. Since he hath eaten me, I shall eat him in
return,--even this, O Bharata, constitutes the character as Mansa of
Mansa.[525] The slayer is always slain. After him the eater meets with
the same fate. He who acts with hostility towards another (in this life)
becomes the victim of similar acts done by that other. Whatever acts one
does in whatever bodies, one has to suffer the consequences thereof in
those bodies.[526] Abstention from cruelty is the highest Religion.
Abstention from cruelty is the highest self-control. Abstention from
cruelty is the highest gift. Abstention from cruelty is the highest
penance. Abstention from cruelty is the highest sacrifice. Abstention
from cruelty is the highest puissance. Abstention from cruelty is the
highest friend. Abstention from cruelty is the highest happiness.
Abstention from cruelty is the highest truth. Abstention from cruelty is
the highest Sruti. Gifts made in all sacrifices, ablutions performed in
all sacred waters, and the merit that one acquires from making all kinds
of gifts mentioned in the scriptures,--all these do not come up to
abstention from cruelty (in point of the merit that attaches to it). The
penances of a man that abstains from cruelty are inexhaustible. The man
that abstains from cruelty is regarded as always performing sacrifices.
The man that abstains from cruelty is the father and mother of all
creatures. Even these, O chief of Kuru's race, are some of the merits of
abstention from cruelty. Altogether, the merits that attach to it are so
many that they are incapable of being exhausted even if one were to speak
for a hundred years."



SECTION CXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Desiring to die or desiring to live, many persons
give up their lives in the great sacrifice (of battle). Tell me, O
grandsire, what is the end that these attain to. To throw away life in
battle is fraught with sorrow for men. O thou of great wisdom, thou
knowest that to give up life is difficult for men whether they are in
prosperity, or adversity, in felicity or calamity. In my opinion, thou
art possessed of omniscience. Do thou tell me the reason of this.'

"Bhishma said, 'In prosperity or adversity, in happiness or woe, living
creatures, O lord of the earth, coming into this world, live according to
a particular tenor. Listen to me as I explain the reason to thee. The
question thou hast asked me is excellent, O Yudhishthira! In this
connection, O king, I shall explain to thee the old narrative of the
discourse that took place in former times between the Island-born Rishi
and a crawling worm. In days of old, when that learned Brahmana, viz.,
the Island-born Krishna, having identified himself with Brahma, roamed
over the world, he beheld, on a road over which cars used to pass, a worm
moving speedily. The Rishi was conversant with the course of every
creature and the language of every animal. Possessed of omniscience, he
addressed the worm he saw in these words.'

"Vyasa said, 'O worm, thou seemest to be exceedingly alarmed, and to be
in great haste. Tell me, whither dost thou run, and whence hast thou been
afraid.'

"The worm said, 'Hearing the rattle of yonder large car I am filled with
fear. O thou of great intelligence, fierce is the roar it makes. It is
almost come! The sound is heard. Will it not kill me? It is for this that
I am flying away. The sound, as it is heard from a near point, I catch,
of the bulls I hear. They are breathing hard under the whip of the
driver, as they are drawing the heavy burden. I hear also the diverse
sounds made by the men who are driving the bulls. Such sounds are
incapable of being heard by a creature that like us has taken his birth
in the order of worms. It is for this reason that I am flying from this
situation of great fright. Death is felt by all creatures to be fraught
with pain. Life is an acquisition difficult to make. Hence, I fly away in
fear, I do not wish to pass from a state of happiness to one of woe.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, the Island-born Vyasa said, 'O worm,
whence can be thy happiness? Thou belongest to the inter-mediate order of
being. I think, death would be fraught with happiness to thee! Sound,
touch, taste, scent, and diverse kinds of excellent enjoyments are
unknown to thee, O worm! I think, death will prove a benefit to thee!'

"The worm said, 'A living creature, in whatever situation he may be
placed, becomes attached to it. In even this order of being I am happy, I
think, O thou of great wisdom! It is for this that I wish to live. In
even this condition, every object of enjoyment exists for me according to
the needs of my body. Human beings and those creatures that spring from
immobile objects have different enjoyments. In my former life I was a
human being. O puissant one, I was a Sudra possessed of great wealth. I
was not devoted to the Brahmanas. I was cruel, vile in conduct, and a
usurer. I was harsh in speech. I regard cunning as wisdom. I hated all
creatures. Taking advantage of pretexts in compacts made between myself
and others. I was always given to taking away what belonged to others.
Without feeding servants and guests arrived at my house, I used to fill,
when hungry, my own stomach, under the impulse of pride, covetous of good
food. Greedy I was of wealth, I never dedicated, with faith and
reverence, any food to the deities and the Pitris although duty required
me to dedicate food unto them. Those men that came to me, moved by fear,
for seeking my protection, I sent adrift without giving them any
protection. I did not extend my protection to those that came to me with
prayers for dispelling their fear. I used to feel unreasonable envy at
seeing other people's wealth, and corn, and spouses held dear by them,
and articles of drink, and good mansions. Beholding the happiness of
others, I was filled with envy and I always wished them poverty,
Following that course of conduct which promised to crown my own wishes
with fruition, I sought to destroy the virtue, wealth, and pleasures of
other people. In that past life of mine, I committed diverse deeds
largely fraught with cruelty and such other passions. Recollecting those
acts I am filled with repentance and grief even as one is filled with
grief at the loss of one's dear son. In consequence of these acts of mine
I do not know what the fruits are of good deeds. I, however, worshipped
my old mother and on one occasion worshipped a Brahmana. Endued with
birth and accomplishments, that Brahmana, in course of his wanderings,
came to my house once as a guest. I received him with reverent
hospitality. In consequence of the merit attaching to that act, my memory
has not forsaken me. I think that in consequence of that act I shall once
more succeed in regaining happiness. O thou of ascetic wealth, thou
knowest everything. Do thou in kindness tell me what is for my good."



SECTION CXVIII

"Vyasa said, 'It is in consequence of a meritorious act, O worm, that
thou, though born in the intermediate order of being, art not stupefied.
That act is mine, O worm, in consequence of which thou art not
stupefied.[527] In consequence of the puissance of my penances, I am able
to rescue a being of demerit by granting him a sight only of my person.
There is no stronger might than the might that attaches to penances, I
know, O worm, that thou hast taken birth in the order of worms through
the evil acts of thy past life. If, however, thou thinkest of attaining
to righteousness and merit, thou mayst again attain to it. Deities as
well as beings crowned with ascetic success, enjoy or endure the
consequence of acts done by them in this field of action. Amongst men
also, when acts of merit are performed, they are performed from desire of
fruit (and not with disregard for fruit). The very accomplishment that
one seeks to acquire are sought from desire of the happiness they will
bring.[528] Learned or ignorant (in a former life) the creature that is,
in this life, destitute of speech and understanding and hands and feet,
is really destitute of everything.[529] He that becomes a superior
Brahmana adores, while alive, the deities of the sun and the moon,
uttering diverse sacred Mantras. O worm, thou shalt attain to that state
of existence. Attaining to that status, thou wilt enjoy all the elements
converted into articles of enjoyment. When thou hast attained to that
state, I shall impart to thee Brahma. Or, if thou wishest, I may place
thee in any other status!' The worm, agreeing to the words of Vyasa, did
not leave the road, but remained on it. Meanwhile, the large vehicle
which was coming in that direction came to that spot.[530] Torn to pieces
by the assault of the wheels, the worm gave up his life-breath. Born at
last in the Kshatriya order through the grace of Vyasa of immeasurable
puissance, he proceeded to see the great Rishi. He had, before becoming a
Kshatriya, to pass through diverse orders of being, such as hedgehog and
Iguana and boar and deer and bird, and Chandala and Sudra and Vaisya.
Having given an account of his various transformations unto the
truth-telling Rishi, and remembering the Rishi's kindness for him, the
worm (now transformed into a Kshatriya) with joined palms fell at the
Rishi's feet and touched them with his head.'

"The worm said, 'My present status is that high one which is coveted by
all and which is attainable by the possession of the ten well-known
attributes. Indeed, I who was formerly a worm have thus attained to the
status of a prince. Elephants of great strength, decked with golden
chains, bear me on their backs. Unto my cars are yoked Kamvoja steeds of
high mettle. Numerous vehicles, unto which are attached camels and mules,
bear me. With all my relatives and friends I now eat food rich with meat.
Worshipped by all, sleep, O highly blessed one, on costly beds in
delightful rooms into which disagreeable winds cannot blow. Towards the
small hours of every night, Sutas and Magadhas and encomiasts utter my
praises even as the deities utter the agreeable praises of Indra, their
chief. Through the grace of thyself that art firm in truth and endued
with immeasurable energy, I who was before a worm have now become a
person of the royal order. I bow my head to thee, O thou of great wisdom.
Do thou command me as to what I should do now. Ordained by the puissance
of thy penances, even this happy status hath now become mine!'

"Vyasa said, 'I have today been worshipped by thee, O king, with diverse
words expressive of reverence. Transformed into a worm, thy memory had
become clouded. That memory has again appeared. The sin thou committed in
a former life has not yet been destroyed,--that sin, viz., which was
earned by thee while thou wert a Sudra covetous of wealth and cruel in
behaviour and hostile to the Brahmanas. Thou wert able to obtain a sight
of my person. That was an act of merit to thee while thou wert a worm. In
consequence of thy having saluted and worshipped me thou shalt rise
higher, for, from the Kshatriya order thou shalt rise to the status of a
Brahmana, if only thou castest off thy life-breaths on the field of
battle for the sake of kine or Brahmanas. O prince, enjoying much
felicity and performing many sacrifices with copious presents, thou shalt
attain to heaven and transformed into eternal Brahma, thou wilt have
perfect beatitude. Those that take birth in the intermediate order (of
animals) become (when they rise) Sudras. The Sudra rises to the status of
the Vaisya; and the Vaisya to that of the Kshatriya. The Kshatriya who
takes pride in the discharge of the duties of his order, succeeds in
attaining to the status of a Brahmana. The Brahmana, by following a
righteous conduct, attains to heaven that is fraught with great
felicity.'"



SECTION CXIX

"Bhishma said, 'Having cast off the status of a worm and taken birth as a
Kshatriya of great energy, the person (of whom I am speaking),
remembering his previous transformations, O monarch, began to undergo
severe austerities. Beholding those severe austerities of the Kshatriya
who was well-conversant with religion and wealth, the Island-born
Krishna, that foremost of Brahmanas, went to him.'

"Vyasa said, The penances that appertain, O worm, to the Kshatriya order
consist of the protection of all creatures. Do thou regard these duties
of the Kshatriya order to be the penances laid down for thee. Thou shalt
then attain to the status of a Brahmana. Ascertaining what is right and
what is wrong, and cleansing thy soul, do thou duly cherish and protect
all creatures, judiciously gratifying all good desires and correcting all
that is unholy. Be thou of cleansed soul, be thou contented and be thou
devoted to the practice of righteousness. Conducting thyself in this way,
thou wilt then, when thou castest off thy life-breaths, become a
Brahmana!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Although he had retired into the woods, yet, O
Yudhishthira, having heard the words of the great Rishi he began to
cherish and protect his subjects righteously. Soon, O best of kings, that
worm, in consequence of the due discharge of the duty of protecting his
subjects, became a Brahmana after casting off his Kshatriya body.
Beholding him transformed into a Brahmana, the celebrated Rishi, viz.,
the Island-born Krishna of great wisdom, came to him.'

"Vyasa said, 'O chief of Brahmanas, O blessed one, be not troubled
(through fear of death)! He who acts righteously attains to respectable
birth. He, on the other hand, who acts unrighteously attains to a low and
vile birth, O thou that art conversant with righteousness, one attains to
misery agreeably the measure of one's sin. Therefore, O worm, do not be
troubled through fear of death. The only fear thou shouldst entertain is
about the loss of righteousness. Do thou, therefore, go on practising
righteousness.'

"The worm said, 'Through thy grace, O holy one, I have attained from
happy to happier positions! Having obtained such prosperity as has its
roots in righteousness, I think, my demerits have been lost.'

"Bhishma said, 'The worm having, at the command of the holy Rishi,
attained to the status of a Brahmana that is so difficult to attain,
caused the earth to be marked with a thousand sacrificial stakes. That
foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma then obtained a residence
in the region of Brahman himself. Indeed, O son of Pritha, the worm
attained to the highest status, viz., that of eternal Brahma, as the
result of his own acts done in obedience to the counsels of Vyasa. Those
bulls among Kshatriyas, also, who have cast off their life-breaths (on
the field of Kurukshetra) exerting their energy the while, have all
attained to a meritorious end. Therefore O king, do not mourn on their
account.'"



SECTION CXX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Which amongst these three is superior, viz.,
knowledge, penances, and gifts? I ask thee, O foremost of righteous
persons! Do tell me this, O grandsire!'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited the old narrative of the
conversation between Maitreya and the Island-born Krishna. Once on a
time, the Island-born Krishna, O king, while wandering over the world in
disguise, proceeded to Baranasi and waited upon Maitreya who belonged by
birth to a race of Munis[531]. Seeing Vyasa arrive, that foremost of
Rishis, viz., Maitreya, gave him a seat and after worshipping him with
due rites, fed him with excellent food. Having eaten that good food which
was very wholesome and which produced every kind of gratification, the
high-souled Krishna became exceedingly delighted and as he sat there, he
even laughed aloud. Seeing Krishna laugh, Maitreya addressed him, saying,
'Tell me, O righteous-souled one, what the reason is of thy laughter!
Thou art an ascetic, endued with capacity to control thy emotions. Great
joy, it seems, has come over thee! Saluting thee, and worshipping thee
with bent head, I ask thee this, viz., what the puissance is of my
penances and what the high blessedness is that is thine! The acts I do
are different from those which thou doest. Thou art already emancipated
though still owning life-breaths. I, however, am not yet freed. For all
that I think that there is not much difference between thee and me. I am
again, distinguished by birth.'[532]

"Vyasa said, 'This wonder that has filled me hath arisen from an
ordinance that looks like a hyperbole, and from its paradoxical statement
for the comprehension of the people. The declaration of the Vedas seems
to be untrue. But why should the Vedas say an untruth? It has been said
that there are three tracks which constitute the best vows of a man One
should never injure; one should always tell the truth; and one should
make gifts. The Rishis of old announced this, following the declarations
of the Vedas. These injunctions were heard in days of old,--they should
certainly be followed by us even in our times. Even a small gift, made
under the circumstances laid down, produces great fruits[533]. Unto a
thirsty man thou hast given a little water with a sincere heart. Thyself
thirsty and hungry, thou hast, by giving me such food, conquered many
high regions of felicity, O puissant one, as, one does by many
sacrifices. I am exceedingly delighted with thy very sacred gift, as also
with thy penances. Thy puissance is that of Righteousness: Thy appearance
is that of Righteousness. The fragrance of Righteousness is about thee. I
think that all thy acts are performed agreeably to the ordinance, O son,
superior to ablutions in sacred waters superior to the accomplishment of
all Vedic vows, is gift. Indeed, O Brahmana, gift is more auspicious than
all sacred acts. If it be not more meritorious than all sacred acts,
there can be no question about its superiority. All those rites laid down
in the Vedas which thou applaudest do not come up to gift, for gift
without doubt, is as I hold, fraught with very superior merit. The track
that has been made by those men who make gifts is the track that is
trodden by the wise. They who make gifts are regarded as givers of even
the life-breaths. The duties that constitute Righteousness are
established in them. As the Vedas when well-studied, as the restraining
of the senses, as a life of universal Renunciation, even so is gift which
is fraught with very superior merit. Thou, O son, wilt rise from joy to
greater joy in consequence of thy having betaken thyself to the duty of
making gifts The man of intelligence (who practises this duty) certainly
rises from joy to greater joy. We have without doubt, met with many
direct instances of this. Men endued with prosperity succeed in acquiring
wealth, making gifts, performing sacrifices, and earning happiness as the
result thereof. It is always observed, O thou of great wisdom, to happen
naturally that happiness is followed by misery and misery is followed by
happiness.[534] Men of wisdom nave said that human beings in this world
have three kinds of conduct. Some are righteous, some are sinful: and
some are neither righteous nor sinful. The conduct of the person who is
devoted to Brahma is not regarded either way. His sins are never regarded
as sins. So also the man who is devoted to the duties laid down for him
is regarded as neither righteous nor sinful (for the observance of those
duties). Those men that are devoted to sacrifices, gifts, and penances,
are regarded as righteous. These, however, that injure other creatures
and are unfriendly to them, are regarded as sinful. There are some men
who appropriate what belongs to others. These certainly fall into Hell
and meet with misery. All other acts that men do are indifferent, being
regarded as neither righteous nor sinful. Do thou sport and grow and
rejoice and make gifts and perform sacrifices. Neither men of knowledge
nor those endued with penances will then be able to get the better of
thee!'"



SECTION CXXI

"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed by Vyasa, Maitreya, who was a worshipper
of acts, who had been born in a race endued with great prosperity, who
was wise and possessed of great learning said unto him these words'.

"Maitreya said, 'O thou of great wisdom, without doubt it is as thou hast
said, O puissant one, with thy permission I desire to say something.'

"Vyasa said, 'Whatever thou wishest to say, O Maitreya, do thou say, O
man of great wisdom, for I wish to hear thee.

"Maitreya said. 'Thy words on the subject of Gift are faultless and pure.
Without doubt, thy soul has been cleansed by knowledge and penances. In
consequence of thy soul being cleansed, even this is the great advantage
I reap from it. With the aid of my understanding I see that thou art
endued with high penances. As regards ourselves we succeed in acquiring
prosperity through only a sight of personages like thee I think, that is
due to thy grace and flows from the nature of my own acts.[535] Penances,
knowledge of the Vedas, and birth in a pure race,--these are the causes
of the status which one acquires of a Brahmana. When one has these three
attributes, then does he come to be called a regenerate person. If the
Brahmana be gratified, the Pitris and the deities are also gratified.
There is nothing superior to a Brahmana possessed of Vedic lore. Without
the Brahmana, all would be darkness. Nothing would be known. The four
orders would not exist. The distinction between Righteousness and
Unrighteousness. Truth and Falsehood, would cease. On a well-tilled
field, an abundant harvest can be reaped. Even so, one may reap great
merit by making gifts unto a Brahmana possessed of great learning. If
there were no Brahmanas endued with Vedic lore and good conduct for
accepting gifts, the wealth possessed by wealthy people would be useless.
The ignorant Brahmana, by eating the food that is offered to him,
destroys what he eats (for it produces no merit to him who gives it). The
food that is eaten also destroys the eater (for the eater incurs sin by
eating what is offered to him). That ought to be properly termed an
eatable which is given away to a deserving man, in all other cases, he
that takes it makes the donor's gift thrown away and the receiver is
likewise ruined for his improperly accepting it. The Brahmana possessed
of learning becomes the subjugator of the food that he eats. Having eaten
it, he begets other food. The ignorant who eats the food offered to him
loses his right to the children he begets, for the latter become his
whose food has enabled the progenitor to beget them. Even this is the
subtle fault that attaches to persons eating other people's food when
they have not the puissance to win that food. The merit which the giver
acquires by making the gift, is equal to what the taker acquires by
accepting the food. Both the giver and the acceptor depend equally upon
each other. Even this is what the Rishis have said. There where Brahmanas
exist, possessed of Vedic lore and conduct, people are enabled to earn
the sacred fruits of gifts and to enjoy them both here and hereafter.
Those men who are of pure lineage, who are exceedingly devoted to
penances, and who make gifts, and study the Vedas, are regarded as worthy
of the most reverent worship. It is those good men that have chalked out
the path by treading on which one does not become stupefied. It is those
men that are the leaders of others to heaven. They are the men who bear
on their shoulders the burden of sacrifices and live for eternity."



SECTION CXXII



"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed, the holy one replied unto Maitreya,
saying 'by good luck, thou art endued with knowledge. By good luck, thy
understanding is of this kind! They that are good highly applaud all
righteous attributes. That personal beauty and youth and prosperity do
not succeed in overwhelming thee is due to good luck. This favour done to
thee is due to the kindness of the deities. Listen to me as I discourse
to thee upon what is even superior (in efficacy) to gift. Whatever
scriptures and religious treatises there are, whatever (righteous)
inclinations are observable in the world, they have flowed in their due
order, agreeably with the lead of the Vedas, according to their due
order. Following them I applaud gift. Thou praisest penances and Vedic
lore. Penances are sacred. Penances are the means by which one may
acquire the Vedas and heaven also. With the aid of penances and of
knowledge, one attains to the highest fruits, we have heard. It is by
penances that one destroys one's sins and all else that is evil. It has
been heard by us that with whatever purpose in view one undergoes
penances, one attains the fruition thereof in consequence of those
penances. The same may be said of knowledge. Whatever is difficult to
accomplish, whatever is difficult to conquer, what is difficult to
attain, and whatever is difficult to cross, can all be achieved with the
aid of penances. Of all things, penances are possessed of very superior
might. The man who drinks alcohol, or he that takes by force what belongs
to others, or he that is guilty of foeticide, or he that violates the bed
of his preceptor, succeeds in crossing with the aid of penances. Indeed,
one becomes cleansed of all these sins through penances. One possessed of
all knowledge and, therefore, having true vision, and an ascetic of
whatever kind, are equal. One should always bow unto these two[536]. All
men who have the Vedas for their wealth should be worshipped. Similarly,
all men endued with penances deserve to be worshipped. Those who make
gifts obtain happiness hereafter and much prosperity here. Righteous men
of this world, by making gifts of food obtain both this world and that of
Brahman himself with many other regions of superior felicity. Those men
who are adored by all, themselves adore him who makes gifts. Those men
that are honoured everywhere themselves honour him who make gifts.
Wherever the giver goes, he bears himself praised, He who does acts and
he who omits to do them gets each what is proportionate to his acts and
omissions. Whether one dwells in the upper regions or in the nether, one
always attains to those places to which one becomes entitled by one's
acts. As regards thyself, thou wilt certainly obtain whatever food and
drink thou mayst covet, Tot thou art endued with intelligence, good
birth, Vedic lore, and compassion! Thou art possessed of youth, O
Maitreya! Thou art observant of vows. Be thou devoted to Righteousness.
Do thou take instructions from me regarding those duties which thou
shouldst first follow,--the duties, viz., of householders. In that house
in which the husband is gratified with his wedded wife, and the wife
gratified with her husband, all auspicious results ensue. As filth is
washed away from the body with water, as darkness is dispelled by the
splendour of fire even so is sin washed off by gifts and penances. Bless
thee, O Maitreya, let mansions be thine! I depart hence in peace. Do thou
keep in mind what I have said. Thou shalt then be able to reap many
advantages! Maitreya then walked round his illustrious guest and bowed
his head unto him, and joining his hands in reverence said, 'Let blessing
be to thee also, O holy one!"



SECTION CXXIII



"Yudhishthira said, 'O thou that art conversant with all duties, I desire
to hear, in detail, what the excellent behaviour is of good and chaste
women. Do thou, O grandsire, discourse to me on this.'

"Bhishma said, 'Once on a time, in the celestial regions, a lady named
Sumana of Kekaya's race addressing Sandili possessed of great energy and
conversant with the truth relating to everything and endued with
omniscience, said, 'By what conduct, O auspicious lady, by what course of
acts, hast thou succeeded in attaining to heaven, purged of every sin?
Thou blazest forth with thy own energy like a flame of fire. Thou seemest
to be a daughter of the Lord of stars, come to heaven in thy own
effulgence. Thou wearest vestments of pure white, and art quite cheerful
and at thy ease. Seated on that celestial chariot, thou shinest, O
auspicious dame, with energy multiplied a thousandfold. Thou hast not, I
ween, attained to this region of happiness by inconsiderable penances and
gifts and vows. Do thou tell me the truth'. Thus questioned sweetly by
Sumana, Sandili of sweet smiles, addressing her fair interrogatrix, thus
answered her out of the hearing of others, I did not wear yellow robes;
nor barks of trees. I did not shave my head; nor did I keep matted locks
on my head. It is not in consequence of these acts that I have attained
to the status of a celestial. I never, in heedlessness, addressed any
disagreeable or evil speech to my husband. I was always devoted to the
worship of the deities, the Pitris, and the Brahmanas. Always heedful I
waited upon and served my mother-in-law and father-in-law. Even this was
my resolution that I should never behave with deceit. I never used to
stay at the door of our house nor did I speak long with anybody. I never
did any evil act; I never laughed aloud; I never did any injury. I never
disclosed any secret. Even thus did I bear myself always. When my
husband, having left home upon any business, used to come back, I always
served him by giving him a seat, and worshipped him with reverence. I
never ate food of any kind which was unknown to my husband and at which
my husband was not pleased. Rising at early dawn I did and caused to be
done whatever was brought about and required to be accomplished for the
sake of relatives and kinsmen. When my husband leaves home for going to a
distant place on any business, I remain at home engaged in diverse kinds
of auspicious acts for blessing his enterprise. Verily, during the
absence of my husband I never use collyrium, or ornaments; I never wash
myself properly or use garlands and unguents, or deck my feet with
lac-dye, or person with ornaments. When my husband sleeps in peace I
never awake him even if important business required his attention. I was
happy to sit by him lying asleep. I never urged my husband to exert more
energetically for earning wealth to support his family and relatives. I
always kept secrets without disclosing them to others. I used to keep
always our premises clean. That woman who with concentrated attention,
adheres to this path of duty, becomes the recipient of considerable
honours in heaven like a second Arundhati.'

''Bhishma continued, 'The illustrious and highly blessed Sandili, of
righteous conduct, having said these words unto Sumana on the subject of
woman's duties towards her husband, disappeared there and then. That man,
O son of Pandu, who reads this narrative at every full moon and new moon,
succeeds in attaining to heaven and enjoying great felicity in the woods
of Nandana."



SECTION CXXIV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Which is of superior efficacy, Conciliation or
Gifts? Tell me, O chief of Bharata's race, which of these two is superior
in point of efficacy.'

'Bhishma said, 'Some become gratified by conciliation, while others are
gratified by gifts. Every man, according to his own nature, affects the
one or the other. Listen to me, O king, as I explain to thee the merits
of conciliation, O chief of Bharata's race, so that the most furious
creatures may be appeased by it. In this connection is cited the ancient
narrative of how a Brahmana, who had been seized in the forest by a
Rakshasa, was freed (with the aid of conciliation). A certain Brahmana,
endued with eloquence and intelligence, fell into distress, for he was
seized in a lone forest by a Rakshasa who wished to feed on him. The
Brahmana, possessed of understanding and learning, was not at all
agitated.' Without suffering himself to be stupefied at the sight of that
terrible cannibal, he resolved to apply conciliation and see its effect
on the Rakshasa. The Rakshasa, respectfully saluting the Brahmana so far
as words went, asked him this question, 'Thou shalt escape, but tell me
for what reason I am pale of hue and so lean!' Reflecting for a brief
space of time, the Brahmana accepted the question of the Rakshasa and
replied in the following well-spoken words'.

"The Brahmana said, 'Dwelling in a place that is distant from thy abode,
moving in a sphere that is not thy own, and deprived of the companionship
of thy friends and kinsmen, thou art enjoying vast affluence. It is for
this that thou art so pale and lean. Verily, O Rakshasa, thy friends,
though well-treated by thee, are still not well-disposed towards thee in
consequence of their own vicious nature. It is for this that thou art
pale and lean. Thou art endued with merit and wisdom and a well-regulated
soul. Yet it is thy lot to see others that are destitute of merit and
wisdom honoured in preference to thyself. It is for this that thou art
pale and lean. Persons possessed of wealth and affluence much greater
than thine but inferior to thee in point of accomplishments are, verily,
disregarding thee. It is for this that thou art pale and lean. Though
distressed through want of the means of support, thou art led by the
highness of thy soul to disregard such means as are open to thee for
drawing thy sustenance. It is for this that thou art pale and lean. In
consequence of thy righteousness thou hadst stinted thyself for doing
good to another, This other, O righteous Rakshasa, thinks thee deceived
and subjugated (by his superior intelligence). It is for this that thou
art pale and lean. I think, thou art grieving for those persons who with
souls overwhelmed by the lust and wrath are suffering misery in this
world. It is for this that thou art pale and lean. Though graced with the
possession of wisdom, thou art ridiculed by others who are entirely
destitute of it. Verily, persons of wicked conduct are condemning thee.
It is for this that thou art pale and lean. Verily, some enemy of thine,
with a friendly tongue, coming to thee behaved at first like a righteous
person and then has left thee, beguiling thee like a knave. It is for
this that thou art pale and lean. Thou art well-conversant with the
course of world's affairs. Thou art well-skilled in all mysteries. Thou
art endued with capacity. Those who know thee to be such do not yet
respect and praise thee. It is for this that thou art pale and lean.
Staying in the midst of bad men engaged together in some enterprise, thou
hadst discoursed to them, dispelling their doubts. For all that they did
not admit thy superior merits. It is for this that thou art pale and
lean. Verily, though destitute of wealth and intelligence and Vedic lore,
thou desirest yet, with the aid of thy energy alone, to accomplish
something great. It is for this that thou art pale and lean. It seems
that although thou art resolved to undergo severe austerities by retiring
into the forest, yet thy kinsmen art not favourably inclined towards this
project of thine. It is this for that thou art pale and lean. Some
neighbour of thine, possessed of great wealth and endued with youth and
handsome features, verily, covets thy dear spouse. It is for this that
thou art pale and lean. The words spoken by thee, even when excellent, in
the midst of wealthy men, are not regarded by them as wise or well-timed.
It is for this that thou art pale and lean. Some dear kinsman of thine,
destitute of intelligence though repeatedly instructed in the scriptures,
has become angry. Thou hast not succeeded in pacifying him. It is for
this that thou art pale and lean. Verily, some-body, having first set
thee to the accomplishment of some object desirable to thee is now
seeking to snatch the fruit thereof from thy grasp. It is for this that
thou art pale and lean. Verily, though possessed of excellent
accomplishments and worshipped by all on that account, thou art yet
regarded by thy kinsmen as worshipped for their sake and not for thy own.
It is for this that thou art pale and lean. Verily, through shame thou
art unable to give out some purpose in thy heart, moved also by the
inevitable delay that will occur in its accomplishment. It is for this
that thou art pale and lean. Verily, thou desirest, with the aid of thy
intelligence, to bring under thy influence, diverse persons with diverse
kinds of understandings and inclinations. It is for this that thou art
pale and lean.[537] Destitute of learning, without courage, and without
much wealth, thou seekest such fame as is won by knowledge and prowess
and gifts. Verily, it is for this that thou hast been pale and lean. Thou
hast not been able to acquire something upon which thou hast set thy
heart for a long time. Or, that which thou seekest to do is sought to be
undone by somebody else. It is for this that thou art pale and lean.
Verily, without being able to see any fault on thy part, thou hast been
cursed by somebody. It is for this that thou art pale and lean.[538]
Destitute of both wealth and accomplishments thou seekest in vain to
dispel the grief of thy friends and the sorrows of sorrowing men. It is
for this that thou art pale and lean. Beholding righteous persons the
domestic mode of life, unrighteous persons living according to the forest
mode, and emancipated persons attached to domesticity and fixed abodes,
thou hast become pale and lean. Verily, thy acts connected with
Righteousness, with Wealth, and with Pleasure, as also the well-timed
words spoken by thee, do not bear fruit. It is for this that thou art
pale and lean. Though endued with wisdom, yet desirous of living, thou
livest with wealth obtained by thee in gift from somebody of evil
conduct. It is for this that thou art pale and lean. Beholding
unrighteousness increasing on every side and righteousness languishing,
thou art filled with grief. It is for this that thou art pale and lean.
Urged by time thou seekest to please all thy friends even when they are
disputing and ranged on sides opposite to one another. It is for this
that thou art pale and lean. Beholding persons possessed of Vedic lore
engaged in improper acts, and persons of learning unable to keep their
senses under control, thou art filled with grief. It is for this that
thou art pale and lean.' Thus praised, the Rakshasa worshipped that
learned Brahmana in return, and making him his friend and bestowing
sufficient wealth upon him in gift, let him off (without devouring him).'"



SECTION CXXV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, how a poor man, desirous of
achieving his own good, should bear himself after having acquired the
status of humanity and come into this region of acts that is so difficult
to attain. Tell me also what is the best of all gifts, and what should be
given under what circumstances. Tell me, O son of Ganga, who art truly
deserving of honour and worship. It behoveth thee to discourse to us on
these mysteries.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus questioned by that famous monarch, viz.,
the son of Pandu, Bhishma explained (in these words) unto that king these
high mysteries appertaining to duty.'

"Bhishma said, 'Listen to me with concentrated attention, O king, as I
explain to thee, O Bharata, these mysteries appertaining to duties, after
the same manner in which the holy Vyasa had explained them to me in days
of yore. This subject is a mystery to the very deities, O monarch. Yama
of stainless deeds, with the aid of vows well-observed and Yoga
meditation, had acquired the knowledge of these mysteries as the high
fruits of his penances.[539] What pleases what deity, what pleases the
Pitris, the Rishis, the Pramathas (associates of Mahadeva), the goddess
Sri, Chitragupta (the recording assistant of Yama), and the mighty
Elephants at the cardinal points of the compass, what constitutes the
religion of the Rishis--the religion, which has many mysteries and which
is productive of high fruits,--the merits of what are called great gifts,
and the merits that attach to all the sacrifices, he who knows these, O
sinless one, and knowing acts according to his knowledge, becomes freed
from stains if he has stains and acquires the merits indicated. Equal to
ten butchers is one oilman. Equal to ten oilmen is one drinker of
alcohol. Equal to ten drinkers of alcohol is one courtezan. Equal to ten
courtezans is a single (territorial) chief.[540] A great king is said to
be equal to half of these all. Hence, one should not accept, gifts from
these. On the other hand, one should attend to the science, that is
sacred and that has righteousness for its indications, of the aggregate
of three (viz., Religion, Wealth, and Pleasure). Amongst these, Wealth
and Pleasure are naturally attractive. Hence, one should, with
concentrated attention, listen to the sacred expositions of Religion (in
particular), for the fruits are very great of listening to the mysteries
of Religion. One should certainly hear every topic connected with
Religion as ordained by the deities themselves. In it is contained the
ritual in respect of the Sraddha in which have been declared the
mysteries connected with the Pitris. The mysteries connected with all the
deities have also been explained there. It comprehends the duties and
practices, productive of great merit, of the Rishis also, together with
the mysteries attaching to them. It contains an exposition of the merits
o f great sacrifices and those that attach to all kinds of gifts. Those
men who always read the scriptures bearing on these topics, those who
bear them properly in their mind, and he who, having listened to them,
follows them in practice, are all regarded to be as holy and sinless as
the puissant Narayana himself. The merits that attach to the gift of
kine, those that belong to the performance of ablutions in sacred waters,
those that are won by the performance of sacrifices,--all these are
acquired by that man who treats guests with reverence. They who listen to
these scriptures, they who are endued with faith, and they who have a
pure heart, it is well-known, conquer many regions of happiness. Those
righteous men who are endued with faith, become cleansed of all stains
and no sin can touch them. Such men always increase in righteousness and
succeed in attaining to heaven. Once on a time, a celestial messenger,
coming to the court of Indra of his own accord, but remaining invisible,
addressed the chief of the deities in these words, 'At the command of
those two deities who are the foremost of all physicians, and who are
endued with every desirable attribute, I have come to this place where I
behold human beings and Pitris and the deities assembled together. Why,
indeed, is sexual congress interdicted for the man who performs a Sraddha
and for him also who eats at a Sraddha (for the particular day)? Why are
three rice-balls offered separately at a Sraddha? Unto whom should the
first of those balls be offered? Unto whom should the second one be
offered? And whose has it been said is the third or remaining one? I
desire to know all this.' After the celestial messenger had said these
words connected with righteousness and duty, the deities who were seated
towards the east, the Pitris also, applauding that ranger of the sky,
began as follows.'

"The Pitris said, 'Welcome art thou, and blessings upon thee! Do thou
listen, O best of all rangers of the sky! The question thou hast asked is
a high one and fraught with deep meaning. The Pitris of that man who
indulges in sexual congress on the day he performs a Sraddha, or eats at
a Sraddha have to lie for the period of a whole month on his vital seed.
As regards the classification of the rice-balls offered at a Sraddha, we
shall explain what should be done with them one after another. The first
rice-ball should be conceived as thrown into the waters. The second ball
should be given to one of the wives to eat. The third ball should be cast
into the blazing fire. Even this is the ordinance that has been declared
in respect of the Sraddha. Even this is the ordinance that is followed in
practice according to the rites of religion. The Pitris of that man who
act according to this ordinance become gratified with him and remain
always cheerful. The progeny of such a man increases and inexhaustible
wealth always remains at his command.'

"The celestial messenger said, 'Thou hast explained the division of the
rice-balls and their consignment one after another to the three (viz.,
water, the spouse, and the blazing fire), together with the reasons
thereof.[541] Whom does that rice-tall which is consigned to the waters
reach? How does it, by being so consigned, gratify the deities and how
does it rescue the Pitris? The second ball is eaten by the spouse. That
has been laid down in ordinance. How do the Pitris of that man (whose
spouse eats the ball) become the eaters thereof? The last ball goes into
the blazing fire. How does that ball succeed in finding its way to thee,
or who is he unto whom it goes? I desire to bear this,--that is, what are
the ends attained by the rice-balls offered at Sraddhas when thus
disposed of by being cast into the water, given to the spouse, and thrown
into the blazing fire!

"The Pitris said, 'Great is this question which thou hast asked. It
involves a mystery and is fraught with wonder. We have been exceedingly
gratified with thee, O ranger of the sky! The very deities and the Munis
applaud acts done in honour of the Pitris. Even they do not know what the
certain conclusions are of the ordinances in respect of the acts done in
honour of the Pitris. Excepting the high souled, immortal, and excellent
Markandeya, that learned Brahmana of great fame, who is ever devoted to
the Pitris, none amongst them is conversant with the mysteries of the
ordinances in respect of the Pitris. Having heard from the holy Vyasa
what the end is of the three rice-balls offered at the Sraddha, as
explained by the Pitris themselves in reply to the question of the
celestial messenger, I shall explain the same to thee. Do thou hear, O
monarch, what the conclusions are with respect to the ordinances about
the Sraddha. Listen with rapt attention, O Bharata, to me as I explain
what the end is of the three rice-balls. That rice-ball which goes into
water is regarded as gratifying the deity of the moon. That deity, thus
gratified, O thou of great intelligence, gratifies in return the other
deities and the Pitris also with them. It has been laid down that the
second rice-ball should be eaten by the spouse (of the man that performs
the Sraddha). The Pitris, who are ever desirous of progeny, confer
children on the woman of the house. Listen now to me as I tell thee what
becomes of the rice-ball that is cast into the blazing fire. With that
ball the Pitris are gratified and as the result thereof they grant the
fruition of all wishes unto the person offering it. I have thus told thee
everything about the end of the three rice-balls offered at the Sraddha
and consigned to the three (viz., water, the spouse, and the fire). That
Brahmana who becomes the Ritwik at a Sraddha constitutes himself, by that
act, the Pitri of the person performing the Sraddha. Hence, he should
abstain that day from sexual intercourse with even his own spouse[542]. O
best of all rangers of the sky, the man who eats at Sraddha should bear
himself with purity for that day. By acting otherwise, one surely incurs
the faults I have indicated. It cannot be otherwise. Hence, the Brahmana
who is invited to a Sraddha for eating the offerings should eat them
after purifying himself by a bath and bear himself piously for that day
by abstaining from every kind of injury or evil. The progeny of such a
person multiply and he also who feeds him reaps the same reward.'

"Bhishma continued, 'After the Pitris said so, a Rishi of austere
penances, named Vidyutprabha, whose form shone with splendour like that
of the sun, spoke. Having heard those mysteries of religion as propounded
by the Pitris, he addressed Sakra, saying, 'Stupefied by folly, men slay
numerous creatures born in the intermediate orders, such as worms and
ants and snakes and sheep and deer and birds. Heavy is the measure of sin
they incur by these acts. What, however, is the remedy? When this
question was asked, all the gods and Rishis endued with wealth of
penances and the highly blessed Pitris, applauded that ascetic.'

"Sakra said, 'Thinking in one's mind of Kurukshetra and Gaya and Ganga
and Prabhasa and the lakes of Pushkara, one should dip one's head in
water. By so doing one becomes cleansed of all one's sins like Chandramas
freed from Rahu. One should bathe in this way for three days in
succession and then fast for every day. Besides this, one should touch
(after bathing) the back of a cow and bow one's head to her tail.
Vidyutprabha, after this, once more addressing Vasava, said, 'I shall
declare a rite that is more subtle. Listen to me, O thou of a hundred
sacrifices. Rubbed with the astringent powder of the hanging roots of the
banian and anointed with the oil of Priyangu, one should eat the
Shashtika paddy mixed with milk. By so doing one becomes cleansed of all
one's sins[543]. Listen now to another mystery unknown to many but which
was discovered by the Rishis with the aid of meditation. I heard it from
Vrihaspati while he recited it in the presence of Mahadeva. O chief of
the deities, do thou hear it with Rudra in thy company, O lord of Sachi!
If a person, ascending a mountain, stands there on one foot, with arms
upraised and joined together, and abstaining from food looks at a blazing
fire, he acquires the merits of severe penances and obtains the rewards
that attach to fasts. Heated by the rays of the sun, he becomes cleansed
of all his sins. One who acts in this way in both the summer and the
winter seasons, becomes freed from every sin. Cleansed of every sin, one
acquires a splendour of complexion for all time. Such a man blazes with
energy like the Sun or shines in beauty like the Moon!' After this, the
chief of the deities, viz., he of a hundred sacrifices, seated in the
midst of the gods, then sweetly addressed Vrihaspati, saying these
excellent words, 'O holy one, do thou duly discourse on what those
mysteries of religion are that are fraught with happiness to human
beings, and what the faults are which they commit, together with the
mysteries that attach to them!'

"Vrihaspati said, 'They who pass urine, facing the sun, they who do not
show reverence for the wind, they who do not pour libations on the
blazing fire, they who milk a cow whose calf is very young, moved by the
desire of obtaining from her as much milk as possible, commit sins. I
shall declare what those faults are, O lord of Sachi! Do thou listen to
me. The Sun, Wind, the bearer of sacrificial oblations, O Vasava, and
kine who are the mothers of all creatures, were created by the Self born
himself, for rescuing all the worlds, O Sakra! These are the deities of
human beings. Listen all of ye to the conclusions of religion. Those
wicked men and wicked women who pass urine facing the sun, live in great
infamy for six and eighty years. That man, O Sakra, who cherishes no
reverence for the wind, gets children that fall away prematurely from the
womb of his spouse. Those men who do not pour libations on the blazing
fire find that the fire, when they do ignite it for such rites as they
wish to perform, refuses to eat their libations[544]. Those men who drink
the milk of kine whose calves are very young, never get children for
perpetuating their races.[545] Such men see their children, die and their
races shrink. Even these are the consequences of the acts referred to, as
observed by regenerate persons venerable for age in their respective
races. Hence, one should always avoid that which has been interdicted,
and do only that which has been directed to be done, if one is desirous
of achieving prosperity. This that I say unto thee is very true.' After
the celestial preceptor had said this, the highly blessed deities, with
the Maruts, and the highly blessed Rishis questioned the Pitris, saying,
'Ye Pitris, at what acts of human beings, who are generally endued with
little understanding, do ye become gratified? What gifts, made in course
of such rites as are gone through for improving the position of deceased
persons in the other world, become inexhaustible in respect of their
efficacy?[546] By performing what acts can men become freed from the debt
they owe to the Pitris? We desire to hear this. Great is the curiosity we
feel.'

"The Pitris said, 'Ye highly blessed ones, the doubt existing in your
minds has been properly propounded. Listen as we declare what those acts
are of righteous men that gratify us. Bulls endued with blue complexion
should be set free. Gifts should be made to us, on the day of the new
moon, of sesame seeds and water. In the season of rains, lamps should be
lighted. By these acts of men, they can free themselves from the debt
they owe to the Pitris.[547] Such gifts never become vain. On the other
hand, they become inexhaustible and productive of high fruits. The
gratification we derive from them is regarded to be inexhaustible. Those
men who, endued with faith, beget offspring, rescue their deceased
ancestors from miserable Hell'. Hearing these words of the Pitris,
Vriddha-Gargya, possessed of wealth of penances and high energy, became
filled with wonder so that the hair on his body stood erect. Addressing
them he said, 'Ye that are all possessed of wealth of penances, tell us.
what the merits are that attach to the setting free of bulls endued with
blue complexion. What merits, again, attach to the gift of lamps in the
season of rains and the gift of water with sesame seeds?'

"The Pitris said, 'If a bull of blue complexion, upon being set free,
raises a (small) quantity of water with its tail, the Pitris (of the
person that has set that bull free) become gratified with that water for
full sixty thousand years. The mud such a bull raises with its horns from
the banks (of a river or lake), succeeds, without doubt, in sending the
Pitris (of the person that sets the animal free) to the region of Soma.
By giving lamps in the season of rains, one shines with effulgence like
Soma himself. The man who gives lamps is never subject to the attribute
of Darkness. Those men who make gifts, on the day of the new moon, of
sesame seeds and water, mixed with honey and using a vessel of copper, O
thou that art possessed of wealth of penances, are regarded as duly
performing a Sraddha with all its mysteries. These men get children of
sound health and cheerful minds. The merit acquired by the giver of the
Pinda (to the Pitris) takes the form of the growth of his race. Verily,
he who performs these acts with faith, becomes freed from the debt he
owes to the Pitris. Even thus has been laid down the proper time for the
performance of the Sraddha, the ordinance in respect of the rites to be
observed, the proper person that should be fed at the Sraddha, and the
merits that attach to it. I have declared everything to thee in due
order.'



SECTION CXXVI

"Bhishma said, 'The chief of the deities, Indra, after the Pitri has
ceased to speak, addressed the puissant Hari, saying, 'O Lord, what are
those acts by which thou becomest gratified? How, indeed, do men succeed
in gratifying thee?'

"Vishnu said, "That which I greatly hate is the detraction of Brahmanas;
without doubt, if the Brahmanas are worshipped, I regard myself
worshipped. All superior Brahmanas should always be saluted with
reverence, after feeding them with hospitality. One should reverence
one's own feet also (in the evening). I am gratified with men who act in
this way, as also with those who worship and make offerings to the whirl
that is noticeable on cowdung (when it first drops from the cow)[548].
They who behold a Brahmana that is a dwarf in stature, or a boar that has
just risen from water and that bears on his head a quantity of mud taken
up from the bank, have never to meet with any evil. They become freed
from every sin. That man who worships every day the Aswattha (Ficus
religiosa) and the substance called Gorochana and the cow, is regarded as
worshipping the whole universe with the deities and Asuras and human
beings. Verily, staying within these, I accept, in my own form, the
worship that is offered to them. The worship that is offered to these is
the worship offered to me. This has been so as long as the worlds have
been created. Those men of little understanding that worship me in a
different way worship me in vain, for the worship of that kind I never
accept. Verily, the worship of other kinds is not at all gratifying to
me.'

"Indra said, 'Why dost thou applaud the circular marks on cowdung, the
feet, the boar, the Brahmana that is a dwarf in stature, and mud raised
up from the soil? It is thou who createst and it is thou who destroyest
them. Thou art the eternal nature of all mortal or transitory things:'

"Bhishma continued, 'Hearing these words of Indra. Vishnu smiled a little
and then said, 'It was with my circular disc that the Daityas were slain.
It was with my two feet that the world was covered. Assuming the form of
a boar I slew Hiranyaksha. Assuming the form of a dwarf I conquered (the
Asura) king Vali. Those high-souled men who worship these gratify me.
Verily, they who worship me in these forms never meet with discomfiture.
If one beholding a Brahmana leading the Brahmacharya mode of life arrived
at one's house, offers unto him the first portion of one's food that
belongs as of right to a Brahmana, and eats what remains thereafter, one
is regarded as eating Amrita. If one, after adoring the morning twilight,
stands with face directed towards the sun, one reaps the merit that
attaches to the performance of ablutions in all tirthas and becomes
cleansed of all sins. Ye Rishis possessed of wealth of penances, I have
told you in details what constitutes a great mystery. On what else shall
I discourse unto you? Tell me your doubts.'

"Baladeva said, 'Listen now to another great mystery that is fraught with
happiness to men. Ignorant persons, unacquainted with it, meet with much
distress at the hands of other creatures. That man who, rising at early
dawn, touches a cow, ghee, and curds, as also mustard seeds and the
larger variety thereof called Priyangu, becomes cleansed of all sins. As
regards Rishis possessed of wealth of penances, they always avoid all
creatures both before and behind, as also all that is impure while
performing Sraddhas.[549]

"The deities said, 'If a person, taking a vessel of copper, filling it
with water, and facing the east, resolves upon a fast or the observance
of a particular vow, the deities become gratified with him and all his
wishes become crowned with success. By observing fasts, or vows in any
other way, men of little understandings gain nothing.[550] In uttering
the resolution about the observance of fasts and in making offerings to
the deities, the use of a vessel of copper is preferable. In presenting
the offerings to the deities, in (giving and accepting) alms, in
presenting the ingredients of the Arghya and in offering oblations of
water mixed with sesame seeds to the Pitris, a vessel of copper should be
used. By doing these acts in any other way, one acquires little merit.
Even these mysteries have been laid down relating to how the deities are
gratified.'

"Dharma said, 'The offerings made in all rites in honour of the deities
and in those in honour of the Pitris should never be given away to a
Brahmana that has accepted service under the king, or that rings the bell
or attends to subsidiary duties in acts of worship or at Sraddhas, or
that keeps kine, or that is engaged in trade, or that follows some art as
a profession, or that is an actor, or that quarrels with friends or that
is destitute of Vedic studies, or that marries a Sudra woman[551]. The
performer of the Sraddha who gives away such offerings unto such a
Brahmana falls away from prosperity and multiplies not his race. He
fails, again, to gratify his Pitris by doing such an act. From the house
of that person whence a guest returns unsatisfied, the Pitris, the
deities, and the sacred fires, all return disappointed in consequence of
such treatment of the guest. That man who does not discharge the duties
of hospitality towards the guest arrived at his abode, comes to be
regarded as equally sinful with those that are slayers of women or of
kine, that are ungrateful towards benefactors, that are slayers of
Brahmanas, or that are violators of the beds of their preceptors.'

"Agni said, 'Listen ye with concentrated attention. I shall recite the
demerits of that man of wicked understanding who lifts up his feet for
striking therewith a cow or a highly blessed Brahmana or a blazing fire.
The infamy of such a man spreads throughout the world and touches the
confines of heaven itself. His Pitris become filled with fear. The
deities also become highly dissatisfied on his account. Endued with great
energy, Fire refuses to accept the libations poured by him. For a hundred
lives he has to rot in hell. He is never rescued at any time. One should,
therefore, never touch a cow with one's feet, or a Brahmana of high
energy, or a blazing fire, if one is endued with faith and desires one's
own good. These are the demerits declared by me of one who lifts up one's
feet towards these three.'

"Viswamitra said, 'Listen to a high mystery that is unknown to the
generality of men and that is connected with religion. He who offers the
Pitris rice boiled in sugared milk, sitting with face directed to the
south at noontide in the shade caused by an elephant's body, in the month
of Bhadrapada, under the constellation Magha, acquires great merits.
Listen to what those merits are. The man who makes such an offering to
the Pitris under such circumstances, is regarded as performing a great
Sraddha each year for thirteen years in succession.'[552]

"The kine said, 'That man becomes cleansed of all his sins who adores a
cow with these Mantras, viz., 'O Vahula, O Samanga, O thou that art
fearless everywhere, O thou that art forgiving and full of
auspiciousness, O friend, O source of all plenty, in the region of
Brahman, in days of yore, thou wert present with thy calf in the
sacrifice of Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt. Thou tookest thy
station in the firmament and in the path of Agni. The deities with Narada
among them adored thee on that occasion by calling thee Sarvamsaha. Such
man attains to the region of Purandara. He acquires, besides, the merits
that attach to kine, and the splendour of Chandramas also. Such a man
becomes freed from every sin, every fear, every grief. At the end, he
obtains residence in the happy region of the Thousand-eyed Indra!'

"Bhishma continued, 'After this, the highly blessed and celebrated seven
Rishis, with Vasishtha at their head, rose and circumambulating the
Lotus-born Brahman, stood around him with hands joined in reverence.
Vasishtha, that foremost of all persons conversant with Brahma, became
their spokesman and asked this question that is beneficial to every
creature, but especially so to Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, 'By doing what
acts may men of righteous conduct who are, however, destitute of the good
of this world, succeed in acquiring merits attaching to sacrifices?'
Hearing this question of theirs, the Grandsire Brahman began to say what
follows.'

"Brahman said, 'Excellent is this question, ye highly blessed ones! It is
at once auspicious and high and fraught with a mystery. This question
that ye have put is subtil and is fraught with high benefit to mankind.
Ye Rishis possessed of wealth of penances, I shall recite everything to
you in detail. Do ye listen with attention to what I say as to how men
acquire the merits attaching to sacrifices (even when they are unable to
perform them through poverty.) In the lighted fortnight of the month of
Pausha, when the constellation Rohini is in conjunction, if one,
purifying oneself by a bath, lies under the cope of heaven, clad in a
single piece of raiment, with faith and concentrated attention, and
drinks the rays of the moon, one acquires the merits that attach to the
performance of great sacrifices. Ye foremost of regenerate persons, this
is a high mystery that I declare unto you in reply to your questions, ye
that are possessed of insight into the subtil truths of all topics of
enquiry.'"



SECTION CXXVII

"Vibhavasu (otherwise called Surya) said, 'There are two offerings. One
of those consists of a palmful of water and the other called Akshata
consists of rice-grains with ghee. One should, on the day of the full
moon, stand facing that bright orb and make unto him the two offerings
mentioned, viz., a palmful of water and the rice-grains with ghee called
Akshata. The man who presents these offerings is said to adore his sacred
fire. Verily, he is regarded as one that has poured libations on the
three (principal) fires. That man of little understanding who cutteth
down a large tree on the day of the new moon, becomes stained with the
sin of Brahmanicide. By killing even a single leaf one incurs that sin.
That foolish man who chews a tooth-brush on the day of the new moon is
regarded as injuring the deity of the moon by such an act. The Pitris of
such a person become annoyed with him.[553] The deities do not accept the
libations poured by such a man on days of the full moon and the new moon.
His Pitris become enraged with him, and his race and the family become
extinct.'

"Sree said, 'That sinful house, in which eating and drinking vessels and
seats and beds lie scattered, and in which women are beaten, the deities
and Pitris leave in disgust. Verily, without accepting the offerings made
unto them by the owners of such houses, the deities and the Pitris fly
away from such a sinful habitation.'

"Angiras said, 'The offspring of that man increase who stands every night
for a full year under a Karanjaka tree with a lamp for lighting it, and
holds besides in his hand the roots of the Suvarchala plant.'[554]

"Gargya said, 'One should always do the duties of hospitality to one's
guests. One should give lamps in the hall or shed where sacrifices are
performed. One should avoid sleep during the day, and abstain from all
kinds of flesh or food. One should never injure kine and Brahmanas. One
should always recite names of the Pushkara lakes and the other sacred
waters. Such a course of duty, is the foremost. Even this constitutes a
high religion with its mysteries. If observed in practice, it is sure to
produce great consequences. If a person performs even a hundred
sacrifices, he is doomed to see the exhaustion of the merits attaching to
the libations poured therein. The duties, however, which I have mentioned
are such that when observed by a person endued with faith, their merit
becomes inexhaustible. Listen now to another high mystery concealed from
the view of many. The deities do not accept the libations (poured upon
the fire) on the occasion of Sraddhas and rites in their honour or on the
occasion of those rites that are performable on ordinary lunar days or on
the especially sacred days of the full moon and the new moon, if they
behold a woman in her season of impurity or one that is the daughter of a
mother afflicted with leprosy. The Pitris of the man who allows such a
woman to come near the place where the Sraddha is being performed by him,
do not become gratified with him for thirteen years. Robed in raiment of
white, and becoming pure in body and mind, one should invite Brahmanas
and cause them to utter their benedictions (when one performs the
Sraddha). On such occasions one should also recite the Bharata. It is by
observing all these that the offerings made at Sraddhas become
inexhaustible.'

"Dhaumya said, 'Broken utensils, broken bedsteads, cocks and, dogs, as
also such trees as have grown within the dwelling houses, are all
inauspicious objects. In a broken utensil is Kali himself, while in a
broken bedstead is loss of wealth. When a cock or a dog is in sight, the
deities do not eat the offerings made to them. Under the roots of a tree
scorpions and snakes undoubtedly find shelter. Hence, one should never
plant a tree within one's abode.'[555]

"Jamadagni said, 'That man whose heart is not pure is sure to go to Hell
even if he adores the deities in a Horse-sacrifice or in a hundred
Vajapeya sacrifices, or if he undergoes the severest austerities with
head downmost. Purity of heart is regarded as equal to sacrifices and
Truth. A very poor Brahmana, by giving only a Prastha of powdered barley
with a pure heart unto a Brahmana, attained to the region of Brahman
himself. This is a sufficient proof (of the importance of purity of
heart).'"



SECTION CXXVIII

"Vayu said, 'I shall recite some duties the observance of which is
fraught with happiness to mankind. Do ye listen also with concentrated
attention to certain transgressions with the secret causes upon which
they depend. That man who offers for the four months of the rainy season
sesame and water (unto the Pitris), and food, according to the best of
his power, unto a Brahmana well-conversant with the duties, who duly
pours libations on the sacred fire, and makes offerings of rice boiled in
sugared milk, who gives lamps in honour of the Pitris, with sesame and
water,--verily he who does all this with faith and concentrated attention
acquires all the merits that attach to a hundred sacrifices in which
animals are offered to the deities. Listen to this other high mystery
that is unknown to all. That man who thinks it all right when a Sudra
ignites the fire upon which he is to pour libations or who does not see
any fault when women who are incompetent to assist at Sraddhas and other
rites are allowed to assist at them, really becomes stained with
sin[556]. The three sacrificial fires become enraged with such a person.
In his next life he has to take birth as a Sudra. His Pitris, together
with the deities are never gratified with him. I shall now recite what
the expiations are which one must go through for cleansing oneself from
such sins. Listen to me with attention. By performing those expiatory
acts, one becomes happy and free from fever. Fasting all the while, one
should, for three days, with concentrated attention, pour libation, on
the sacred fire, of the urine of the cow mixed with cowdung and milk and
ghee. The deities accept the offerings of such a man on the expiration of
a full year. His Pitris also, when the time comes for him for performing
the Sraddha, become gratified with him. I have thus recited what is
righteous and what is unrighteous, with all their unknown details, in
respect of human beings desirous of attaining to heaven. Verily, men who
abstain from these transgressions or who having committed them undergo
the expiatory rites indicated, succeed, in attaining to heaven when they
leave this world."



SECTION CXXIX

"Lomasa said, 'The Pitris of those men who, without having wedded wives
of their own, betake themselves to the wives of other people, become
filled with disappointment when the time for the Sraddhas comes. He who
betakes himself to the wives of other people, he who indulges in sexual
union with a woman that is barren, and he who appropriates what belongs
to a Brahmana, are equally sinful. Without doubt, the Pitris of such
people cut them off without desiring to have any intercourse with them.
The offerings they make fail to gratify the deities and the Pitris.
Hence, one should always abstain from sexual congress with women that are
the wedded wives of others, as also with women that are barren. The man
who desires his own good should not appropriate what belongs to a
Brahmana. Listen now to another mystery, unknown to all with regard to
religion. One should, endued with faith, always do the bidding of one's
preceptor and other seniors. On the twelfth lunar day, as also on the day
of the full moon, every month, one should make gifts unto Brahmanas of
ghee and the offerings that constitute Akshata. Listen to me as I say
what the measure is of the merit that such a person acquires. By such an
act one is said to increase Soma and the Ocean. Vasava, the chief of the
celestials, confers upon him a fourth part of the merits that attach to a
Horse-sacrifice. By making such gifts, a person becomes endued with great
energy and prowess. The divine Soma, well-pleased with him, grants him
the fruition of his wishes. Listen now to another duty, together with the
foundation on which it rests, that is productive of great merit. In this
age of Kali, that duty, if performed, brings about much happiness to men.
That man who, rising at early dawn and purifying himself by a bath,
attires himself in white robes and with the concentrated attention makes
gifts unto Brahmanas of vessels full of sesame seeds, who makes offerings
unto the Pitris of water with sesame seeds and honey, and who gives lamps
as also the food called Krisara acquires substantial merits. Listen to me
as I say what those merits are. The divine chastiser of Paka has ascribed
these merits to the gift of vessels of copper and brass filled with
sesame seeds. He who makes gifts of kine, he who makes gifts of land that
are productive of eternal merit, he who performs the Agnishtoma sacrifice
with copious presents in the form of Dakshina to the Brahmanas, are all
regarded by the deities as acquiring, merits equal to those which one
acquires by making gifts of vessels filled with sesame seeds. Gifts of
water with sesame seeds are regarded by the Pitr is as productive of
eternal gratification to them. The grandsires all become highly pleased
with gifts of lamps and Krisara. I have thus recited the ancient
ordinance, laid down by the Rishis, that is highly applauded by both the
Pitris and the deities in their respective regions.'"



SECTION CXXX

"Bhishma said, 'The Rishis there assembled, together with the Pitris and
the deities, then, with concentrated attention, questioned Arundhati (the
spouse of Vasishtha) who was endued with great ascetic merit. Possessed
of abundant wealth of penances, Arundhati was equal to her husband, the
high-souled Vasishtha in energy for in both vows and conduct she was her
husband's equal. Addressing her they said, 'We desire to hear from thee
the mysteries of duty and religion. It behoveth thee, O amiable lady, to
tell us what thou regardest as a high mystery.'

"Arundhati said, 'The great progress I have been able to achieve in
penances is due to your consideration for me in thus remembering my poor
self. With your gracious permission I shall now discourse on duties that
are eternal, on duties that are high mysteries. I shall discourse thereon
with the causes on which they depend. Listen to me as I discourse to you
elaborately. A knowledge of these should be imparted unto him only that
is possessed of faith or that has a pure heart. These four, viz., he that
is bereft of faith, he that is full of pride, he that is guilty of
Brahmanicide, and he that violates the bed of his preceptor, should never
be talked to. Religion and duty should never be communicated unto them.
The merits acquired by a person who gives away a Kapila cow every day for
a period of two and ten years, or by a person who adores the deities
every month in a sacrifice, or by him who gives away hundreds of
thousands of kine in the great Pushkara, do not come up to those that are
his with whom a guest is gratified. Listen now to another duty whose
observance is fraught with happiness to mankind. It should be observed
with its secret ritual by a person endued with faith, Its merits are
certainly high. Listen to what they are. If a person, rising at early
dawn and taking with him a quantity of water and a few blades of Kusa
grass, proceeds into a cow-pen and arriving there washes a cow's horns by
sprinkling thereon that water with those blades of Kusa grass and then
causes the water to drip down on his own head, he is regarded, in
consequence of such a bath, as one that has performed his ablutions in
all the sacred waters that the wise have heard to exist in the three
worlds and that are honoured and resorted to by Siddhas and Charanas.'
After Arundhati had said these words, all the deities and Pitris
applauded her, saying, 'Excellent, Excellent,' Indeed, all the beings
there were highly gratified and all of them worshipped Arundhati.'

"Brahman said, 'O highly blessed one, excellent is the duty that thou
hast enunciated, together with its secret ritual. Praise be to thee! I
grant thee this boon, viz., that thy penances will continually increase!'

"Yams said, 'I have heard from thee an excellent and agreeable discourse.
Listen now to what Chitragupta has said and what is agreeable to me.
Those words relate to duty with its secret ritual, and are worthy of
being heard by the great Rishis, as also by men endued with faith and
desirous of achieving their own good. Nothing is lost of either piety or
sin that is committed by creatures. On days of the full moon and the new
moon, those acts are conveyed to the sun where they rest. When a mortal
goes into the region of the dead, the deity of the sun bears witness to
all his acts. He that is righteous acquires the fruits of his
righteousness there. I shall now tell you of some auspicious duties that
are approved by Chitragupta. Water for drink, and lamps for lighting
darkness, should always be given, as also sandals and umbrellas and
Kapila kine with due rites. In Pushkara especially should one make the
gift of a Kapila cow unto a Brahmana conversant with the Vedas. One
should also always maintain one's Agnihotra with great care. Here is
another duty which was proclaimed by Chitragupta. It behoveth them that
are the best of creatures to listen to what the merits are of that duty
separately. In course of time, every creature is destined to undergo
dissolution. They that are of little understanding meet with great
distress in the regions of the dead, for they become afflicted by hunger
and thirst. Indeed, they have to rot there, burning in pain. There is no
escape for them from such calamity. They have to enter into a thick
darkness. I shall now tell you of those duties by performing which one
may succeed in crossing such calamity. The performance of those duties
costs very little but is fraught with great merit. Indeed, such
performance is productive of great happiness in the other world. The
merits that attach to the gift of water for drink are excellent. In the
next world in especial, those merits are very high. For them that make
gifts of water for drink there is ordained in the other world a large
river full of excellent water. Indeed, the water contained in that river
is inexhaustible and cool and sweet as nectar. He who makes gifts of
water in this world drinks from that stream in the world hereafter when
he goes thither. Listen now to the abundant merits that attach to the
giving of lamps. The man who gives lamps in this world has never to even
behold the thick darkness (of Hell). Soma and Surya and the deity of fire
always give him their light when he repairs to the other world. The
deities ordain that on every side of such a person there should be
blazing light. Verily, when the giver of lights repairs to the world of
the dead, he himself blazes forth in pure effulgence like a second Surya.
Hence, one should give lights while here and water for drink in especial.
Listen now to what the merits are of the person who makes the gift of a
Kapila cow to a Brahmana conversant with the Vedas, especially if the
gift be made in Pushkara. Such a man is regarded as having made a gift of
a hundred kine with a bull, a gift that is productive of eternal merit.
The gift of a single Kapila cow is capable of cleansing whatever sins the
giver may be guilty of even if those sins be as grave. Brahmanicide, for
the gift of a single Kapila cow is regarded as equal in point of merit to
that of a hundred kine. Hence, one should give away a Kapila cow at that
Pushkara which is regarded as the senior (of the two Tirthas known by
that name) on the day of the full moon in the month of Karttika. Men that
succeed in making such a gift have never to encounter distress of any
kind, or sorrow, or thorns giving pain. That man who gives away a pair of
sandals unto a superior Brahmana that is deserving of the gift, attains
to similar merits. By giving away an umbrella a person obtains
comfortable shade in the next world. (He will not have to be exposed to
the sun). A gift made to a deserving person is never lost. It is certain
to produce agreeable consequences to the giver.' Hearing these opinions
of Chitragupta, Surya's hairs stood on their ends. Endued with great
splendour, he addressed all the deities and the Pitris, saying 'Ye have
heard the mysteries relating to duty, as propounded by the high-souled
Chitragupta. Those human beings who, endued with faith, make these gifts
unto high-souled Brahmanas, become freed from fear of every kind. These
five kinds of men, stained with vicious deeds, have no escape. Verily, of
sinful behaviour and regarded as the worst of men, they should never be
talked to. Indeed they should always be avoided. Those five are he who is
the slayer of a Brahmana, he who is the slayer of a cow, he who is
addicted to sexual congress with other people's wives, he who is bereft
of faith (in the Vedas), and he who derives his sustenance by selling the
virtue of his wife. These men of sinful conduct, when they repair to the
region of the dead, rot in hell like worms that live upon pus and blood.
These five are avoided by the Pitris, the deities, the Snataka Brahmanas,
and other regenerate persons that are devoted to the practice of
penances.'"



SECTION CXXXI

"Bhishma said, 'Then all the highly blessed deities and the Pitris, and
the highly blessed Rishis also, addressing the Pramathas, said,[557] 'Ye
are all highly blessed beings. Ye are invisible wanderers of the night.
Why do you afflict those men that are vile and impure and that are
unclean? What acts are regarded as impediments to your power? What,
indeed, are those acts in consequence of which ye become incompetent to
afflict men? What are those acts that are destructive of Rakshasas and
that prevent you from asserting your power over the habitations of men?
Ye wanderers of the night, we desire to hear all this from you.'

"The Pramathas said, 'Men are rendered unclean by acts of sexual
congress. They who do not purify themselves after such acts, they who
insult their superiors, they who from stupefaction eat different kinds of
meat, the man also who sleeps at the foot of a tree, he who keeps any
animal matter under his pillow while lying down for sleep, and he who
lies down or sleeps placing the head where his feet should be placed or
his feet where the head should be placed,--these men are regarded by us
as unclean. Verily, these men have many holes. Those also are numbered in
the same class who throw their phlegm and other unclean secretions into
the water. Without doubt these men deserve to be slain and eaten up by
us. Verily, we afflict those human beings who are given to such conduct.
Listen now to what those acts are which are regarded as antidotes and in
consequence of which we fail to do any injury to men. Those men upon
whose persons occur streaks of Gorochana, or who hold Vachas in their
hands, or who make gifts of ghee with those ingredients that go by the
name of Akshata, or who place ghee and Akshata on their heads, or those
who abstain from meat are incapable of being afflicted by us. That man in
whose house the sacred fire burns day and night without being ever put
out, or who keeps the skin or teeth of a wolf in his abode or a
hill-tortoise, or from whose habitation the sacrificial smoke is seen to
curl upwards, or who keeps a cat or a goat that is either tawny or black
in hue, is free from our power. Verily, those householders who keep these
things in their houses always find them free from the inroads of even the
fiercest spirits that live on carrion. Those beings also, that like us
range through different worlds in pursuit of pleasure, are unable to do
any injury to such houses. Hence, ye deities, should men keep such
articles in their houses,--articles that are destructive of Rakshasas
(and other beings of the kind). We have thus told you everything about
that respecting which ye had great doubts.'"



SECTION CXXXII

"Bhishma said, 'After this, the Grandsire Brahman, sprang from the
primeval lotus and resembling the lotus (in agreeableness and fragrance),
addressed the deities with Vasava, the lord of Sachi, at their
head,--Yonder sits the mighty Naga who is a resident of the nether
regions. Endued with great strength and energy, and with great prowess
also, his name is Renuka. He is certainly a great being. Those mighty
elephants endued with great energy and power, who hold the entire earth
with her hills, waters, and lakes should be interviewed by this Renuka at
your request. Let Renuka go to them and ask them about the mysteries of
religion or duty.--Hearing these words of the Grandsire, the deities,
with well-pleased minds commissioned (the elephant) Renuka to where those
upholders of the world are.'"

"Renuka, proceeding to where those elephants are, addressed them, saying,
'Ye mighty creatures, I have been commanded by the deities and the Pitris
to question you about the mysteries of religion and duty. I desire to
bear you discourse on that subject in detail. Ye highly blessed ones, do
ye discourse on the subject as your wisdom may dictate.'

"The (eight) elephants standing in the eight quarters said, 'On the
auspicious eighth day of the dark fortnight in the month of Karttika when
the constellation Aslesha is in the ascendant, one should make gifts of
treacle and rice. Casting aside wrath, and living on regulated diet, one
should make these offerings at a Sraddha, uttering these mantras the
while--Let Valadeva and other Nagas possessed of great strength, let
other mighty snakes of huge bodies that are indestructible and eternal,
and let all the other great snakes that have taken their birth in their
race, make Vali offerings to me for the enhancement of my strength and
energy. Verily, let my strength be as great as that of the blessed
Narayana when he raised the submerged Earth!--Uttering these mantras, one
should make Vali offerings upon an ant-hill. When the maker of day
retires to his chambers in the west, upon the ant-hill selected should
offerings be made of raw sugar and rice. The ant-hill should previously
be scattered with Gajendra flowers, Offerings should also be made of blue
cloths and fragrant unguents. If offerings are made in this way, those
beings that live in the nether regions, bearing the weight of the upper
regions upon their heads or shoulders, become well-pleased and gratified.
As regards ourselves, we also do not feel the labour of upholding the
Earth, in consequence of such offerings being made to us. Afflicted with
the burden we bear, even this is what we think (beneficial for men),
without the slightest regard for selfish concerns. Brahmanas and
Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras, by observing this rule for a full
year, fasting on each occasion, acquire great merits from such gifts. We
think that the making of such Vali offerings on the ant-hill is really
fraught with very superior merits. By making such offerings, one is
regarded as doing the duties of hospitality for a hundred years to all
the mighty elephants that exist in the three worlds.' Hearing these words
of the mighty elephants, the deities and the Pitris and the highly
blessed Rishis, all applauded Renuka."



SECTION CXXXIII

"Maheswara said, 'Searching your memories, excellent are the duties ye
all have recited. Listen all of you now to me as I declare some mysteries
relating to religion and duty. Only those persons whose understanding has
been set on religion and who are possessed of faith, should be instructed
in respect of those mysteries of duty and religion that are fraught with
high merits. Hear what the merits are that become his who, with heart
free from anxiety, gives food everyday, for a month, to kine and contents
himself with one meal a day throughout such period. The kine are highly
blessed. They are regarded as the most sacred of all sacred things.
Verily, it is they that are upholding the three worlds with the deities,
the Asuras, and human beings. Respectful services rendered to them are
fraught with high merit and grave consequences. That man who every day
gives food to kine advances every day in religious merit. Formerly, in
the Krita age I had expressed my approval of these creatures. Afterwards
Brahman, born of the primeval lotus, solicited me (to show kindness
towards kine).[558] It is for this reason that a bull to this day stands
as the device on my standard overhead. I always sport with kine. Hence
should kine be worshipped by all. Kine are possessed of great power. They
are givers of boons. If worshipped, they would grant boons. That person
who gives food to kine even for a single day receives from those
beneficent creatures for that act a fourth part of the merits he may win
by all his good acts in life.'"



SECTION CXXXIV

"Skanda said, 'I shall now declare a duty that is approved of by me. Do
ye listen to it with concentrated attention. That person who takes a
little earth from the horns of a bull of blue complexion, smears his body
therewith for three days, and then performs his ablutions, acquires great
merits. Hear what those merits are. By such an act he would wash away
every stain and evil, and attain to sovereign sway hereafter. As many
times he takes his birth in this world, so many times does he become
celebrated for his heroism. Listen now to another mystery unknown to all.
Taking a vessel of copper and placing therein some cooked food after
having mixed it with honey, one should offer it as Vali unto the rising
moon on the evening of the day when that luminary is at full. Do ye
learn, with faith, what the merits are of the person that acts in this
way. The Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Adityas, the Viswedevas, the twin
Aswins, the Maruts, and the Vasus, all accept that offering. By such an
offering Soma increases as also the ocean, that vast receptacle of
waters. This duty that is declared by me and that is unknown to all, if
performed, is certainly fraught with great happiness.'

"Vishnu said, 'That person who, endued with faith and freed from malice,
listens every day with concentrated attention to the mysteries in respect
of religion and duty that are preserved by the high-souled deities and
those mysteries also of the same kind that are preserved by the Rishis,
has never to succumb to any evil. Such a person becomes also freed from
every fear. That man who, with his senses under thorough control, reads
these sections which treat of these auspicious and meritorious duties,
together with their mysteries,--duties that have been declared (by the
previous speakers), acquires all the merits that attach to their actual
performance. Sin can never overmaster him. Verily, such a man can never
be stained with faults of any kind. Indeed, one wins abundant merits by
reading these mysteries (as declared), or by reciting them to others, or
by hearing them recited. The deities and the Pitris eat, for ever the
Havya and the Kavya offered by such a creature. Both these, in
consequence of the virtues of the offerer become inexhaustible. Even such
is the merit that attaches to the person who, with concentrated
attention, recites these mysteries to foremost of Brahmanas on days of
the full moon or the new moon. Such a person, in consequence of such an
act, becomes steady in the observance of all duties. Beauty of form and
prosperity also become his. He succeeds, besides this, in becoming the
favourite, for all time, of the Rishis and the deities and the Pitris. If
a person becomes guilty of all sins save those which are classed as grave
or heinous, he becomes cleansed of them all by only listening to the
recitation of these mysteries about religion and duty.'

"Bhishma continued, 'Even these, O king of men, are the mysteries in
respect of religion and duty dwelling in the breasts of the deities. Held
in high respect by all the gods and promulgated by Vyasa, they have now
been declared by me for thy benefit. One who is conversant with religion
and duty thinks that this excellent knowledge is superior (in value) to
even the whole earth full of riches and wealth. This knowledge should not
be imparted to one that is bereft of faith, or to one that is an atheist,
or to one that has fallen away from the duties of his order, or to one
that is destitute of compassion, or to one that is devoted to the science
of empty disputations, or to one that is hostile to one's preceptors, or
to one that thinks all creatures to be different from oneself.'"



SECTION CXXXV

"Yudhishthira said, 'Who are those persons, O Bharata, from whom a
Brahmana in this world may accept his food? From whom may a Kshatriya, a
Vaisya, and a Sudra take their food respectively?'

"Bhishma said, 'A Brahmana may take his food from another Brahmana or
from a Kshatriya or a Vaisya, but he must never accept food from a Sudra.
A Kshatriya may take his food from a Brahmana, a Kshatriya or a Vaisya.
He must, however, eschew food given by Sudras who are addicted to evil
ways and who partake of all manner of food without any scruple. Brahmanas
and Kshatriyas can partake of food given by such Vaisyas as tend the
sacred fire every day, as are faultless in character, and as perform the
vow of Chaturmasya. But the man who takes food from a Sudra, swallows the
very abomination of the earth, and drinks the excretions of the human
body, and partakes of the filth of all the world. He partakes of the very
filth of the earth who takes his food thus from a Sudra. Verily, those
Brahmanas that take their food from Sudras, take the dirt of the earth.
If one engages in the service of a Sudra, one is doomed to perdition
though one may duly perform all the rites of one's order. A Brahmana, a
Kshatriya, or a Vaisya, so engaging, is doomed, although devoted to the
due performance of religious rites. It is said that a Brahmana's duty
consists in studying the Vedas and seeking the welfare of the human race;
that a Kshatriya's duty consists in protecting men, and that a Vaisya's
in promoting their material prosperity. A Vaisya lives by distributing
the fruits of his own acts and agriculture. The breeding of kine and
trade are the legitimate work in which a Vaisya may engage without fear
of censure. The man who abandons his own proper occupation and betakes
himself to that of a Sudra, should be considered as a Sudra and on no
account should any food be accepted from him. Professors of the healing
art, mercenary soldiers, the priest who acts as warder of the house, and
persons who devote a whole year to study without any profit, are all to
be considered as Sudras. And those who impudently partake of food offered
at ceremonials in a Sudra's house are afflicted with a terrible calamity.
In consequence of partaking such forbidden food they lose their family,
strength, and energy, and attain to the status of animals, descending to
the position of dogs, fallen in virtue and devoid of all religious
observances. He who takes food from a physician takes that which is no
better than excrement; the food of a harlot is like urine; that of a
skilled mechanic is like blood. If a Brahmana approved by the good, takes
the food of one who lives by his learning, he is regarded as taking the
food of a Sudra. All good men should forego such food. The food of a
person who is censured by all is said to be like a draught from a pool of
blood. The acceptance of food from a wicked person is considered as
reprehensible as the slaying of a Brahmana. One should not accept food if
one is slighted and not received with due honours by the giver. A
Brahmana, who does so, is soon overtaken by disease, and his race soon
becomes extinct. By accepting food from the warder of a city, one
descends to the status of the lowest outcaste. If a Brahmana accepts food
from one who is guilty of killing either a cow or a Brahmana or from one
who has committed adultery with his preceptor's wife or from a drunkard,
he helps to promote the race of Rakshasas. By accepting food from a
eunuch, or from an ungrateful person, or from one who has misappropriated
wealth entrusted to his charge, one is born in the country of the Savaras
situated beyond the precincts of the middle country. I have thus duly
recited to thee the persons from whom food may be accepted and from whom
it may not. Now tell me, O son of Kunti, what else thou wishest to hear
from me today.'"



SECTION CXXXVI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou hast told me in full of those from whom food
may be accepted and of those from whom it should not be taken. But I have
grave doubts on one point. Do thou, O sire, enlighten me, do thou tell me
what expiation a Brahmana should make (for the sin he incurs) upon
accepting the different kinds of food, those especially offered in honour
of the gods and the oblations made to the manes.'

"Bhishma said, 'I shall tell thee, O prince, how high-souled Brahmanas
may be absolved from all sin incurred by accepting food from others. In
accepting clarified butter, the expiation is made by pouring oblations on
the fire, reciting the Savitri hymn. In accepting sesamum, O
Yudhishthira, the same expiation has to be made. In accepting meat, or
honey, or salt, a Brahmana becomes purified by standing till the rising
of the sun. If a Brahmana accepts gold from any one, he becomes cleansed
of all sins by silently reciting the great Vedic prayer (Gayatri) and by
holding a piece of iron in his hand in the presence of the public. In
accepting money or clothes or women or gold, the purification is the same
as before. In accepting food, or rice boiled in milk and sugar, or
sugarcane juice, or sugar-cane, or oil, or any sacred thing, one becomes
purified by bathing thrice in the course of the day, viz., at morn, noon
and eve. If one accepts, paddy, flowers, fruits, water, half-ripe barley,
milk, or curdled milk, or anything made of meal or flour, the expiation
is made by reciting the Gayatri prayer a hundred times. In accepting
shoes or clothes at obsequial ceremonies, the sin is destroyed by
reciting devoutly the same hymn a hundred times. The acceptance of the
gift of land at the time of an eclipse or during the period of impurity,
is expiated by observing a fast during three successive nights. The
Brahmana who partakes of oblations offered to deceased ancestors, in
course of the dark fortnight, is purified by fasting for a whole day and
night. Without performing his ablutions a Brahmana should not say his
evening prayers, nor betake himself to religious meditation, nor take his
food a second time. By so doing he is purified. For this reason, the
Sraddha of deceased ancestors has been ordained to be performed in the
afternoon and then the Brahmana who has been invited beforehand should be
feasted, The Brahmana who partakes of food at the house of a dead person
on the third day after the death, is purified by bathing three times
daily for twelve days. After the expiration of twelve days, and going
through the purification ceremonies duly, the sin is destroyed by giving
clarified butter to Brahmanas. If a man takes any food in the house of a
dead person, within ten days after the death, he should go through all
the expiations before mentioned, and should recite the Savitri hymn and
do the sin-destroying Ishti and Kushmanda penances. The Brahmana who
takes his food in the house of a dead person for three nights, becomes
purified by performing his ablutions thrice daily for seven days, and
thus attains all the objects of his desire, and is never troubled by
misfortunes. The Brahmana who takes his food in the company of Sudras is
purged from all impurity by duly observing the ceremonies of
purification. The Brahmana who takes his food in the company of Vaisyas
is absolved from sin by living on alms for three successive nights. If a
Brahmana takes his food with Kshatriyas, he should make expiation by
bathing with his clothes on. By eating with a Sudra from off the same
plate the Sudra loses his family respectability; the Vaisya by eating
from off the same plate with a Vaisya, loses his cattle and friends. The
Kshatriya loses his prosperity, and the Brahmana his splendour and
energy. In such cases, expiations should be made, and propitiatory rites
should be observed, and oblations offered to the gods. The Savitri hymn
should be recited and the Revati rites and Kushmanda penances should be
observed with the view of destroying the sin. If any of the above four
classes partake of food partly eaten by a person of any other class, the
expiation is undoubtedly made by smearing the body with auspicious
substances like Rochana, Durva grass, and turmeric.'"



SECTION CXXXVII

"Yudhishthira said, 'O Bharata, of the two things charity and devotion,
do thou condescend to tell me, O sire, which is the better in this world?
Do thou, by this, remove a great doubt from my mind.'

"Bhishma said, 'Do thou, listen to me as I recite the names of the
princes who having been devoted to virtue, and having cleansed their
hearts by penances and practised gifts and other acts of piety,
undoubtedly attained to the different celestial regions. The Rishi Atreya
revered by all, attained, O monarch, to the excellent celestial regions,
by imparting the knowledge of the unconditional Supreme Being to his
pupils. King Sivi, the son of Usinara, by offering the life of his dear
son, for the benefit of a Brahmana, was translated from this world to
heaven. And Pratardana, the king of Kasi, by giving his son to a
Brahmana, secured to himself unique and undying fame in this as well as
in the other world. Rantideva, the son of Sankriti, attained to the
highest heaven by duly making gifts to the high-souled Vasishtha.
Devavriddha too went to heaven by giving a hundred-ribbed and excellent
golden umbrella to a Brahmana for a sacrifice. The worshipful Amvarisha
too has attained to the region of the gods, by making a gift of all his
kingdom to a Brahmana of great power. King Janamejaya of the solar race,
went to the highest heaven by making a gift of ear-rings, fine vehicles,
and cows to Brahmanas. The Royal sage Vrishadarbhi went to heaven by
making gifts of various jewels and beautiful houses to Brahmanas. King
Nimi of Vidarva, attained to heaven with his sons, friends and cattle, by
giving his daughter and kingdom to the high-souled Agastya. The far-famed
Rama, the son of Jamadagni, attained to the eternal regions, far beyond
his expectation, by giving lands to Brahmanas. Vasishtha, the prince of
Brahmanas, preserved all the creatures at a time of great drought when
the god Parjjanya did not bestow his grateful showers upon the earth, and
for this act he has secured eternal bliss for himself. Rama, the son of
Dasaratha, whose fame is very high in this world, attained to the eternal
regions by making gifts of wealth at sacrifices. The far-famed royal sage
Kakshasena, went to heaven by duly making over to the high-souled
Vasishtha the wealth which he had deposited with him. Marutta, the son of
Parikshita and the grandson of Karandhama, by giving his daughter in
marriage to Angiras, immediately went to heaven. The highly devout king
of Panchalal Brahmadatta, attained the blessed way by giving away a
precious conch-shell. King Mitrasaha, by giving his favourite wife
Madayanti to the high-souled Vasishtha, ascended to heaven. Sudyumna, the
son of Manu, by causing the proper punishment to be inflicted upon the
high-souled Likhita, attained to the most blessed regions. The celebrated
royal sage Saharachitta went to the blessed regions, by sacrificing his
dear life for the sake of a Brahmana. The king Satadyumna went to heaven
by giving to Maudgaya a golden mansion replete with all the objects of
desire. In ancient times, king Sumanyu by giving to Sandilya heaps of
food looking like a hill, proceeded to heaven. The Salwa prince Dyutimat
of great splendour attained to the highest regions by giving his kingdom
to Richika. The Royal sage Madiraswa by giving his slender-waisted
daughter to Hiranyahasta went to the region of the gods. The lordly
Lomapada attained all the vast objects of his desire by giving his
daughter Santa in marriage to Rishyasringa. The royal sage Bhagiratha, by
giving his famous daughter Hansi in marriage to Kautsa, went to the
eternal regions. King Bhagiratha by giving hundreds and thousands of kine
with their young ones to Kohala attained to the most blessed regions.
These and many other men, O Yudhishthira, have attained to heaven, by the
merit of their charities and penances and they have also returned from
thence again and again. Their fame will endure as long as the world will
last. I have related to thee, O Yudhishthira, this story of those good
householders who have attained to eternal regions by dint of their
charities and penances. By their charities and by performing sacrifices
and by procreating offspring, these people have attained to the heavenly
regions. O foremost scion of Kuru's race, by always performing acts of
charity, these men applied their virtuous intellects to the performance
of sacrifices and charities. O mighty prince, as night has approached I
shall explain to thee in the morning whatever doubts may arise in thy
mind.'"



SECTION CXXXVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'I have heard from thee, O sire, the names of those
kings that have ascended to heaven. O thou whose power is great in the
observance of the vow of truth by following the religion of gift. How
many kinds of gift are there that should be given? What are the fruits of
the several kinds of gifts respectively? For what reasons, what kinds of
gifts, made to what persons are productive of merits? Indeed, unto what
persons should what gifts be made? For what reasons are how many kinds of
gifts to be made? I desire to hear all this in detail.'"

"Bhishma said, 'Listen, O son of Kunti, in detail to me, O sinless one as
I discourse on the subject of gifts. Indeed, I shall tell you, O Bharata,
how gifts should be made unto all the orders of men. From desire of
merit, from desire of profit, from fear, from free choice, and from pity,
gifts are made, O Bharata! Gifts, therefore, should be known to be of
five kinds. Listen now to the reasons for which gifts are thus
distributed in five classes. With mind freed from malice one should make
gifts unto Brahmanas, for by making gifts unto the one acquires fame here
and great felicity hereafter. (Such gifts are regarded as made from
desire of merit.) He is in the habit of making gifts; or he has already
made gifts to me. Hearing such words from solicitors one gives away all
kinds of wealth unto a particular solicitor. (Such gifts are regarded as
made from desire of profit.) I am not his, nor is he mine. If
disregarded, he may injure me. From such motives of fear even a man of
learning and wisdom may make gifts unto an ignorant wretch. (Such gifts
are regarded as made from fear.) This one is dear to me, I am also dear
to him. Influenced by considerations like these, a person of
intelligence, freely and with alacrity, make gifts unto a friend. (Such
gifts are regarded as made from free choice.) The person that solicits me
is poor. He is, again, gratified with a little. From considerations such
as these, one should always make gifts unto the poor, moved by pity.
(Gifts made from such considerations are regarded as made from pity.)
These are the five kinds of gift. They enhance the giver's merits and
fame. The Lord of all creatures (Brahman himself) has said that one
should always make gifts according to one's power.'"



SECTION CXXXIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, thou art possessed of great wisdom.
Indeed, thou art fully conversant with every branch of learning. In our
great race thou art the only individual that swellest with all the
sciences. I desire to hear from thee discourses that are interwoven with
Religion and Profit, that lead to felicity hereafter, and that are
fraught with wonder unto all creatures. The time that has come is fraught
with great distress. The like of it does not generally come to kinsmen
and friends. Indeed, save thee, O foremost of men, we have now none else
that can take the place of an instructor. If, O sinless one, I with my
brothers deserve the favour, it behoveth thee to answer the question I
desire to ask thee. This one is Narayana who is endued with every
prosperity and is honoured by all the kings. Even he waits upon thee,
showing thee every indulgence and honouring thee greatly. It behoveth
thee to discourse unto me, through affection, for my benefit as also for
that of my brothers, in the presence of Vasudeva himself and of all these
kings.'"

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Hearing these words of king Yudhishthira,
Bhishma, the son of the river called after Bhagiratha, filled with joy in
consequence of his affection for the monarch and his brothers, said what
follows.'[559]

"Bhishma said, 'I shall certainly recite to thee discourses that are
delightful, on the subject, O king, of the puissance of this Vishnu as
displayed in days of yore and as I have heard (from my preceptors).
Listen to me also as I describe the puissance of that great god who has a
bull for his device. Listen to me as I narrate also the doubt that filled
the mind of the spouse of Rudra and that of Rudra himself. Once on a time
the righteous souled Krishna observed a vow extending for ten and two
years. For beholding him who had gone through the rite of initiation for
the observance of his great vow, there came to that place Narada and
Parvata, and the Island-born Krishna, and Dhaumya, that foremost of
silent reciters, and Devala, and Kasyapa, and Hastikasyapa. Other Rishis
also, endued with Diksha and self-restraint, followed by their disciples
and accompanied by many Siddhas and many ascetics of great merit, came
there. The son of Devaki offered them such honours of hospitality as are
deserving of the highest praise and as are offered unto the gods alone.
Those great Rishis sat themselves down upon seats some of which were
green and some endued with the colour of gold and some that were fraught
with the plumes of the peacock and some that were perfectly new and
fresh. Thus seated, they began to converse sweetly with one another on
subjects connected with Religion and duty as also with many royal sages
and deities. At that time the energy, in the form of fire, Narayana,
rising from the fuel that consisted of the rigid observance of his vow,
issued out of the mouth of Krishna of wonderful feats. That fire began to
consume those mountains with their trees and creepers and little plants,
as also with their birds and deer and beasts of prey and reptiles. Soon
the summit of that mountain presented a distressing and pitiful
appearance, Inhabited by animals of diverse kinds which began to utter
cries of woe and pain, the summit soon became bereft of every living
creature. That fire of mighty flames, having consumed everything without
leaving a remnant at last came back to Vishnu and touched his feet like a
docile disciple. That crusher of foes, viz., Krishna, beholding that
mountain burnt, cast a benignant look upon it and thereby brought it back
to its former condition. That mountain thereupon once more became adorned
with flowering trees and creepers, and once more echoed with the notes
and cries of birds and deer and animals of prey and reptiles. Seeing that
wonderful and inconceivable sight, all the ascetics became amazed. Their
hairs stood on end and their vision was blurred with tears. That foremost
of speakers, Narayana, beholding those Rishis thus filled with wonder,
addressed them in these sweet and refreshing words, 'Why, indeed, has
wonder filled the hearts of this assemblage of Rishis, these ascetics
that are always free from attachment of every kind, that are divested of
the idea of meum, and that are fully conversant with every sacred
science? It behoveth these Rishis possessed of wealth of penances and
freed from every stain to explain to me truly this doubt that has arisen
in my mind.'"

"The Rishis said, 'It is thou that createst all the worlds, and it is
thou that destroyest them again. It is thou that art Winter, it is thou
that art Summer, and it is thou that art the season of rains. Of all the
creatures, mobile and immobile, that are found on the earth, thou art the
father, thou art the mother, thou art the master, and thou art the
origin! Even this, O slayer of Madhu, is a matter of wonder and doubt
with us. O source of all auspiciousness, it behoveth Thee to resolve to
us that doubt, viz., the issue of fire from Thy mouth. Our fears being
dispelled we shall then, O Hari, recite to thee what we have heard and
seen.'"

"Vasudeva said, 'The fire that issued from my mouth and that resembles
the all-consuming Yuga-fire in splendour, and by which this mountain has
been crushed and scorched, is nothing else than the energy of Vishnu. Ye
Rishis, ye are persons that have subjugated wrath, that have brought your
senses under complete control, that are endued with wealth of penances,
and that are very gods in puissance. Yet ye have suffered yourselves to
be agitated and distressed! I am now engaged wholly with the observances
relating to rigid vow. Verily, in consequence of my observing the vows of
an ascetic, a fire issued from my mouth. It behoves you not to suffer
yourselves to be agitated. It is for observing a rigid vow that I came to
this delightful and auspicious mountain. The object that has brought me
here is to acquire by the aid of penances a son that would be my equal in
energy. In consequence of my penances, the Soul existing in my body
became transformed into fire and issued out of my mouth. That fire had
repaired to behold the boon-giving Grandsire of all the universe. The
Grandsire, ye foremost of ascetics, told my soul that half the energy of
the great god having the bull for his device would take birth as my son.
That fire returning from its mission, has come back to me and approached
my feet like a disciple desirous of serving me dutifully. Indeed, casting
off its fury it has come back to me to its own proper nature. I have thus
told you, in brief, a mystery appertaining to Him who has the lotus for
his origin and who is endued with great intelligence. Ye Rishis possessed
of wealth of penances, ye should not give way to fear! Ye are endued with
far-reaching vision. Ye can proceed to every place without any
impediment. Blazing with vows observed by ascetics, ye are adorned with
knowledge and science. I now ask you to tell me something that is highly
wonderful which you have heard of or seen on earth or in heaven. I feel
an eager desire to taste the honey of that speech which will drop from
your lips, the honey that will, I am sure, be as sweet as a jet of nectar
itself. If I behold anything on earth or in heaven, which is highly
delightful and of wonderful aspect but which is unknown to all of you, ye
Rishis that look like so many gods, I say that that is in consequence of
my own Supreme Nature which is incapable of being obstructed by anything.
Anything wonderful whose knowledge dwelleth in me or is acquired by my
own inspiration ceases to appear wonderful to me. Anything, however, that
is recited by pious persons and that is heard from those that are good,
deserves to be accepted with respect and faith. Such discourses exist on
earth for a long time and are as durable as characters engraved on rocks.
I desire, therefore, to hear, at this meeting something dropping from the
lips of persons that are good and that cannot fail to be productive of
good to men.' Hearing these words of Krishna all those ascetics became
filled with surprise. They began to gaze at Janardana with those eyes of
theirs that were as beautiful and large as the petals of the lotus. Some
of them began to glorify him and some began to worship him with
reverence. Indeed, all of them then hymned the praises of the slayer of
Madhu with words whose meanings were adorned with the eternal Riks. All
those ascetics then appointed Narada, that foremost of all persons
conversant with speech, to gratify the request of Vasudeva.'

"The ascetics said, 'It behoveth thee, O Narada, to describe, in full,
from the beginning, unto Hrishikesa, that wonderful and inconceivable
incident which occurred, O puissant one, on the mountains of Himavat and
which, O ascetic, was witnessed by those of us that had proceeded thither
in course of our pilgrimage to the sacred waters. Verily, for the benefit
of all the Rishis here assembled, it behoveth thee to recite that
incident.' Thus addressed by those ascetics, the celestial Rishi, viz.,
the divine Narada, then recited the following story whose incidents had
occurred some time before.'"



SECTION CXL

"Bhishma said, 'Then Narada, that holy Rishi, that friend of Narayana,
recited the following narrative of the discourse between Sankara and his
spouse Uma.'

"Narada said, 'Once on a time the righteous-souled lord of all the
deities, viz., Mahadeva with the bull for his device, practised severe
penances on the sacred mountains of Himavat that are the resort of
Siddhas and Charanas. Those delightful mountains are overgrown with
diverse kinds of herbs and adorned with various species of flowers. At
that time they were peopled by the different tribes of Apsaras and crowds
of ghostly beings. There the great god sat, filled with joy, and
surrounded by hundreds of ghostly beings who presented diverse aspects to
the eye of the beholder. Some of them were ugly and awkward, some were of
very handsome features, and some presented the most wonderful
appearances. Some had faces like the lion's, some like the tiger's and
some like the elephant's. In fact, the faces of those ghostly creatures
presented every variety of animal faces. Some had faces resembling that
of the jackal, some whose faces resembled the pard's; some like the
ape's, some like the bull's. Some of them had faces like the owl's; some
like the hawk's; some had faces like those of deer of diverse varieties.
The great god was also surrounded by Kinnaras and Yakshas and Gandharvas
and Rakshasas and diverse other created beings. The retreat to which
Mahadeva had betaken himself also abounded with celestial flowers and
blazed with celestial rays of light. It was perfumed with celestial
sandal, and celestial incense was burnt on every side. And it echoed with
the sounds of celestial instruments. Indeed, it resounded with the beat
of Mridangas and Panavas, the blare of conchs, and the sound of drums. It
teemed with ghostly beings of diverse tribes that danced in joy and with
peacocks also that danced with plumes outspread. Forming as it did the
resort of the celestial Rishis, the Apsaras danced there in joy. The
place was exceedingly agreeable to the sight. It was exceedingly
beautiful, resembling Heaven itself. Its entire aspect was wonderful and,
indeed, it is indescribable in respect of its beauty and sweetness.
Verily, with the penances of that great deity who sleeps on mountain
breasts, that prince of mountains shone with great beauty. It resounded
with the chant of the Vedas uttered by learned Brahmanas devoted to Vedic
recitation. Echoing with the hum of bees, O Madhava, the mountain became
incomparable in beauty. The ascetics, beholding the great deity who is
endued with a fierce form and who looks like a great festival, became
filled, O Janardana, with great joy. All the highly blessed ascetics, the
Siddhas who have drawn in their vital seed, the Maruts, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the Viswedevas, Vasava himself, the Yakshas, the Nagas, the
Pisachas, the Regents of the world, the several sacred Fires, the Winds,
and all the great creatures dwelt on that mountain with minds
concentrated in Yoga. All the Seasons were present there and scattered
those regions with all kinds of wonderful flowers. Diverse kinds of
blazing herbs illuminated the woods and forests on that mountain. Various
species of birds, filled with joy, hopped about and sang merrily on the
delightful beast of that mountain. Those birds were exceedingly lovable
in consequence of the notes they uttered. The high-souled Mahadeva sat,
displayed in beauty, on one of the peaks that was adorned with excellent
minerals, as if it served the purposes of a fine bedstead. Round his
loins was a tiger-skin, and a lion-skin formed his upper garments. His
sacred thread consisted of a snake. His arms were decked with a pair of
red Angadas, His beard was green. He had matted locks on his head. Of
terrible features, he it is that inspires with fear the hearts of all the
enemies of the gods. It is he, again, that assures all creatures by
dispelling their fears. He is adored by his worshippers as the deity
having the bovine bull for his device. The great Rishis, beholding
Mahadeva, bowed to him by touching the ground with their heads. Endued
with forgiving souls, they all became (in consequence of the sight they
had obtained of the great deity) freed from every sin and thoroughly
cleansed. The retreat of that lord of all creatures with many terrible
forms, shone with a peculiar beauty. Abounding with many large snakes, it
became unapproachable and unbearable (by ordinary beings). Within the
twinkling of the eye. O slayer of Madhu, everything there became
exceedingly wonderful. Indeed, the abode of that great deity having the
bovine bull for his device began to blaze with a terrible beauty. Unto
Mahadeva seated there, came his spouse, the daughter of Himavat,
surrounded by the wives of the ghostly beings who are the companions of
the great deity. Her attire was like that of her lord and the vows she
observed were like those of his. She held a jar on her loins that was
filled with the waters of every Tirtha, and was accompanied by the
presiding deities (of her own sex) of all the mountain streams. Those
auspicious ladies walked in her train. The goddess approached raining
flowers on every side and diverse kinds of sweet perfumes. She who loved
to reside on the breast of Himavat advanced in this guise towards her
great lord. The beautiful Uma, with smiling lips and desirous of playing
a jest, covered from behind, with her two beautiful hands, the eyes of
Mahadeva. As soon as Mahadeva's eyes were thus covered, all the regions
became dark and life seemed to be extinct everywhere in the universe. The
Homa rites ceased. The universe became suddenly deprived of the sacred
Vashat also. All living creatures became cheerless and filled with fear.
Indeed, when the eyes of the lord of all creatures were thus closed, the
universe seemed to become sunless. Soon, however, that overspreading
darkness disappeared. A mighty and blazing flame of fire emanated from
Mahadeva's forehead. A third eye, resembling another sun, appeared (on
it). That eye began to blaze forth like the Yuga-fire and began to
consume that mountain. The large-eyed daughter of Himavat, beholding what
occurred, bowed her head unto Mahadeva endued with that third eye which
resembled a blazing fire. She stood there with gaze fixed on her lord.
When the mountain forests burned on every side, with their Was and other
trees of straight Trunks, and their delightful sandals and diverse
excellent medicinal herbs, herds of deer and other animals, filled with
fright, came with great speed to the place where Hara sat and sought his
protection. With those creatures almost filling it, the retreat of the
great deity blazed forth with a kind of peculiar beauty. Meanwhile, that
fire, swelling wildly, soared up to the very heavens and endued with the
splendour and unsteadiness of lightning and looking like a dozen suns in
might and effulgence, covered every side like the all-destroying
Yuga-fire. In a moment, the Himavat mountains were consumed, with their
minerals and summits and blazing herbs. Beholding Himavat crushed and
consumed, the daughter of that prince of mountains sought the protection
of the great deity and stood before him her hands joined in reverence.
Then Sarva, seeing Uma overcome by an accession of womanly mildness and
finding that she was unwilling to behold her father Himavat reduced to
that pitiable plight, cast benignant looks upon the mountain. In a moment
the whole of Himavat was restored to his former condition and became as
beautiful to look at as ever. Indeed, the mountain put forth a cheerful
aspect. All its trees became adorned with flowers. Beholding Himavat to
his natural condition, the goddess Uma, divested of every fault,
addressed her lord, that master of all creatures, the divine Maheswara,
in these words.'

"Uma said, 'O holy one, O lord of all creatures, O deity that art armed
with the trident, O thou of high vows, a great doubt has filled my mind.
It behoveth thee to resolve that doubt for me. For what reason has this
third eye appeared in thy forehead? Why also was the mountain consumed
with the woods and all that belonged to it? Why also, O illustrious
deity, hast thou restored the mountain to its former condition? Indeed,
having burnt it once, why hast thou again caused it to be covered with
trees?'

"Maheswara said, 'O goddess without any fault, in consequence of thy
having covered my eyes through an act of indiscretion the universe became
in a moment devoid of light. When the universe became sunless and,
therefore, all became dark, O daughter of the prince of mountains, I
created the third eye desirous of protecting all creatures. The high
energy of that eye crushed and consumed this 'mountain. For pleasing
thee, however, O goddess, I once more made Himavat what he was by
repairing the injury.'

"Uma said, 'O holy one, why are those faces of thine which are on the
east, the north, and the west, so handsome and so agreeable to look at
like the very moon? And why is that face of thine which is on the south
so terrible? Why are thy matted locks tawny in hue and so erect? Why is
thy throat blue after the manner of the peacock's plumes? Why, O
illustrious deity, is the Pinaka always in thy hand? Why art thou always
a Brahmacharin with matted locks? O lord, it behoves thee to explain all
these to me. I am thy spouse who seeks to follow the same duties with
thee. Further, I am thy devoted worshipper, O deity, having the bull for
thy mark!'

"Narada continued, 'Thus addressed by the daughter of the prince of
mountains, the illustrious wielder of Pinaka, the puissant Mahadeva,
became highly gratified with her. The great god then addressed her
saying, 'O blessed lady, listen to me as I explain, with the reasons
thereof, why my forms are so.'"



SECTION CXLI

"The blessed and holy one said, 'In days of yore, a blessed woman was
created by Brahman, called Tilottama, by culling grains of beauty from
every beautiful object in the universe. One day, that lady of beautiful
face, unrivalled in the universe for beauty of form, came to me, O
goddess, for circumambulating me but really impelled by the desire of
tempting me. In whatever direction that lady of beautiful teeth turned, a
new face of mine instantly appeared (so eager did I become to see her).
All those faces of mine became agreeable to look at. Thus, in consequence
of the desire of beholding her, I became four-faced, through
Yoga-puissance, Thus, I showed my high Yoga-power in becoming four-faced.
With that face of mine which is turned towards the east, I exercise the
sovereignty of the universe, With that face of mine which is turned
towards the north, I sport with thee, O thou of faultless features! That
face of mine which is turned towards the west is agreeable and
auspicious. With it I ordain the happiness of all creatures. That face of
mine which is turned towards the south is terrible. With it I destroy all
creatures. I live as a Brahmacharin with matted locks on my head,
impelled by the desire of doing good to all creatures. The bow Pinaka is
always in my hand for accomplishing the purposes of the deities. In days
of yore, Indra, desirous of acquiring my prosperity, had hurled his
thunderbolt at me. With that weapon my throat was scorched. For this
reason I have become blue-throated.'

"Uma said, 'When, O foremost of all creatures, there are so many
excellent vehicles endued with great beauty, why is it that thou hast
selected a bovine bull for thy vehicle?'

"Maheswara said, 'In the days of yore, the Grandsire Brahma created the
celestial cow Surabhi yielding abundant milk. After her creation there
sprang from her a large number of kine all of which yielded copious
quantities of milk sweet as nectar. Once on a time a quantity of froth
fell from the mouth of one of her calves on my body. I was enraged at
this and my wrath scorched all the kine which thereupon became
diversified in hue. I was then pacified by the Master of all the worlds,
viz., Brahma, conversant with all topics. It was he who gave me this bull
both as a vehicle for bearing me and as a device on my banner.'

"Uma said, 'Thou hast many abodes in heaven, of diverse forms and
possessed of every comfort and luxury. Why, O holy one, dost thou reside
in the crematorium, abandoning all those delightful mansions? The
crematorium is full of the hair and bones (of the dead), abounds with
vulture and jackals, and is strewn with hundreds of funeral pyres. Full
of carrion and muddy with fat and blood, with entrails and bones strewn
all over it, and always echoing with the howls of jackals, it is
certainly an unclean place.'

"Maheswara said, 'I always wander over the whole earth in search of a
sacred spot. I do not, however, see any spot that is more sacred than the
crematorium. Hence, of all abodes, the crematorium pleases my heart most,
shaded that it generally is by branches of the banian and adorned with
torn garlands of flowers. O thou of sweet smiles, the multitudes of
ghostly beings that are my companions love to reside in such spots. I do
not like, O goddess, to reside anywhere without those ghostly creatures
being by my side. Hence, the crematorium is a sacred abode to me. Indeed,
O auspicious lady, it seems to me to be the very heaven. Highly sacred
and possessed of great merit, the crematorium is much applauded by
persons desirous of having holy abodes.'

"Uma said, 'O holy one, O lord of all creatures, O foremost of all
observers of duties and religious rites, I have a great doubt, O wielder
of Pinaka, O giver of boons. These ascetics, O puissant lord, have
undergone diverse kinds of austerities. In the world are seen ascetics
wandering everywhere under diverse forms and clad in diverse kinds of
attire. For benefiting this large assemblage of Rishis, as also myself,
do thou kindly resolve, O chastiser of all foes, this doubt of mine. What
indications has Religion or Duty been said to possess? How, indeed, do
men become unacquainted with the details of Religion or Duty to succeed
in observing them? O puissant lord, O thou that art conversant with
Religion, do thou tell me this.'

"Narada continued, 'When the daughter of Himavat put this question,
conclave of Rishis there present worshipped the goddess and adored her
with words adorned with Riks and with hymns fraught with deep import.'

"Maheswara said, 'Abstention from injury, truthfulness of speech,
compassion towards all beings, tranquillity of soul, and the making of
gifts to the best of one's power, are the foremost duties of the
householder. Abstention from sexual congress with the spouses of other
men, protection of the wealth and the woman committed to one's charge,
unwillingness to appropriate what is not given to one, and avoidance of
honey and meat,--these are the five chief duties. Indeed, Religion or
Duty has many branches all of which are fraught with happiness. Even
these are the duties which these embodied creatures who regard duty as
superior should observe and practise. Even these are the sources of
merit.'

"Uma said, O holy one, I wish to ask thee another question about which I
have great doubts. It behoveth thee to answer it and dispel my doubts.
What are the meritorious duties of the four several orders? What duties
appertain to the Brahmana? What to the Kshatriya? What are the
indications of those duties that appertain to the Vaisya? And what kind
of duties appertain to the Sudra?'

"The holy one said, 'O highly blessed lady, the question thou hast asked
is a very proper one. Those persons that belong to the regenerate order
are regarded as highly blessed, and are, indeed, gods on earth. Without
doubt, the observance of fasts (i.e., subjugation of the senses) is
always the duty of the Brahmana. When the Brahmana succeeds in properly
observing all his duties, he attains to identity with Brahma.[560] The
proper observance of the duties of Brahmacharya, O goddess, are his
ritual. The observance of vows and the investiture with the sacred thread
are his other duties. It is by these that he becomes truly regenerate. He
becomes a Brahmana for worshipping his preceptors and other seniors as
also the deities. Verily, that religion which has for its soul the study
of the Vedas is the source of all piety. Even that is the religion which
those embodied creatures who are devoted to piety and duty should observe
and practise.'

"Uma said, 'O holy one, my doubts have not been dispelled. It behoveth
thee to explain in detail what the duties are of the four respective
orders of men.'

"Maheswara said, 'Listening to the mysteries of religion and duty,
observance of the vows indicated in the Vedas, attention to the sacred
fire, and accomplishment of the business of the preceptor, leading a
mendicant life, always bearing the sacred thread, constant recitation of
the Vedas, and rigid observance of the duties of Brahmacharya, are the
duties of the Brahmana. After the period of study is over, the Brahmana,
receiving the command of his preceptor, should leave his preceptor's
abode for returning to his father's house. Upon his return he should duly
wed a wife that is fit for him. Another duty of the Brahmana consists in
avoiding the food prepared by the Sudra. Walking along the path of
righteousness, always observing fasts and the practices of Brahmacharya,
are his other duties.[561] The householder should keep up his domestic
fire for daily worship. He should study the Vedas. He should pour
libations in honour of the Pitris and the deities. He should keep his
senses under proper control. He should eat what remains after serving
gods and guests and all his dependants. He should be abstemious in food,
truthful in speech, and pure both externally and internally. Attending to
guests is another duty of the householder, as also the keeping up of the
three sacrificial fires. The householder should also attend to the
ordinary sacrifices that go by the name of Ishti and should also dedicate
animals to the deities according to the ordinances. Indeed, the
performance of sacrifices is his highest duty as also a complete
abstention from injury to all creatures. Never to eat before serving the
deities and guests and dependants is another duty of the householder. The
food that remains after serving gods and guests and dependants is called
Vighasa. The householder should eat Vighasa. Indeed, to eat after the
members of one's family including servants and other dependants, is
regarded as one of the special duties of the regenerate householder, who
should, be conversant with the Vedas. The conduct of husband and wife, in
the case of householder, should be equal. He should every day make
offerings of flowers and other articles unto those deities that preside
over domesticity. The householder should take care that his house is
every day properly rubbed (with cowdung and water). He should also
observe fasts every day. Well-cleaned and well-rubbed, his house should
also be every day fumigated with the smoke of clarified butter poured on
his sacred fire in honour of the deities and the Pitris. Even these are
the duties appertaining to the householder's mode of life as observable
by a regenerate person. Those duties really uphold the world. Verily,
those duties always and eternally flow from those righteous persons among
the Brahmanas that lead a life of domesticity. Do thou listen to me with
concentrated attention, O goddess, for I shall now tell thee what the
duties are which appertain to the Kshatriya and about which thou hast
asked me. From the beginning it has been said that the duty of the
Kshatriya is to protect all creatures. The king is the acquirer of a
fixed share of the merits earned by his subjects. By that means the king
becomes endued with righteousness. That ruler of men who rules and
protects his subjects righteously, acquires, by virtue of the protection
he offers to others, many regions of felicity in the world to come. The
other duties of a person of the kingly order consist of self-restraint
and Vedic study, the pouring of libations on the sacred fire, the making
of gifts, study, the bearing of the sacred thread, sacrifices, the
performance of religious rites, the support of servants and dependants,
and perseverance in acts that have been begun. Another duty of his is to
award punishments according to the offences committed. It is also his
duty to perform sacrifices and other religious rites according to the
ordinances laid down in the Vedas. Adherence to the practice of properly
judging the disputes of litigants before him, and a devotion to
truthfulness of speech, and interference for aiding the distressed, are
the other duties by discharging which the king acquires great glory both
here and hereafter. He should also lay down his life on the field of
battle, having displayed great prowess on behalf of kine and Brahmanas.
Such a king acquires in Heaven such regions of felicity as are capable of
being won by the performance of Horse-sacrifices. The duties of the
Vaisya always consist of the keeping of cattle and agriculture, the
pouring of libations on the sacred fire, the making of gifts, and study.
Trade, walking in the path of righteousness, hospitality, peacefulness,
self-restraint, welcoming of Brahmanas, and renouncing things (in favour
of Brahmanas), are the other eternal duties of the Vaisya. The Vaisya,
engaged in trade and walking in the path of righteousness, should never
sell sesame and perfumery and juices or liquid substances. He should
discharge the duties of hospitality towards all. He is at liberty to
pursue religion and wealth and pleasure according to his means and as
much as is judicious for him. The service of the three regenerate classes
constitutes the high duty of the Sudra. That Sudra who is truthful in
speech and who has subdued his senses is regarded as having acquired
meritorious penances. Verily, the Sudra, who having got a guest,
discharges the duties of hospitality towards him, is regarded as
acquiring the merit of high penances. That intelligent Sudra whose
conduct is righteous and who worships the deities and Brahmanas, becomes
endued with the desirable rewards of righteousness. O beautiful lady, I
have thus recited to thee what the duties are of the four orders. Indeed,
O blessed lady, I have told thee what their respective duties are. What
else dost thou wish to hear?'

"Uma said, 'Thou has recited to me what the respective duties are of the
four orders, auspicious and beneficial for them. Do thou now tell me, O
holy one, what the common duties are of all the orders.'

"Maheswara said, 'The foremost of all beings in the universe viz., the
Creator Brahma, ever desirous of righteous accomplishments, created the
Brahmanas for rescuing all the worlds. Among all created beings, they
are, verily, gods on earth. I shall at the outset tell thee what the
religious acts are which they should do and what the rewards are which
they win through them. That religion which has been ordained for the
Brahmanas is the foremost of all religions. For the sake of the
righteousness of the world, three religions were created by the Self-born
One. Whenever the world is created (or re-created), those religions are
created by the Grandsire. Do thou listen. These are the three eternal
religions. The religion that is propounded in the Vedas is the highest;
that which is propounded in the Smritis is the next in the order of
importance; the third in importance is that which is based upon the
practices of those who are regarded as righteous. The Brahmans possessed
of learning should have the three Vedas. He should never make the study
of the Vedas (or recitation of the scriptures) the means of his
living.[562] He should devote himself to the three well-known acts (of
making gifts, studying the Vedas, and performing sacrifices). He should
transcend' the three (viz., lust, wrath, and covetousness). He should be
the friend of all creatures. A person that possesses these attributes is
called a Brahmans. The lord of the universe declared these six acts for
the observance of Brahmanas. Listen to those eternal duties. The
performance of sacrifices, officiating at the sacrifices of others, the
making of gifts, the acceptance of gifts, teaching, and study, are the
six acts by accomplishing which a Brahmans wins religious merit. Verily,
the daily study of the Vedas is a duty. Sacrifice is (another) eternal
duty. The making of gifts according to the measure of his power and
agreeable to the ordinance, is, in his case, much applauded. Tranquillity
of mind is a high duty that has always been current among them that are
righteous. Householders of pure mind are capable of earning very great
merit. Indeed, he who cleanses his soul by the performance of the five
sacrifices, who is truthful in speech, who is free from malice, who makes
gifts, who treats with hospitality and honour all regenerate guests, who
lives in well-cleaned abodes, who is free from pride, who is always
sincere in his dealings, who uses sweet and assuring words towards
others, who takes pleasure in serving guests and others arrived at his
abode, and who eats the food that remains after the requirements have
been gratified of all the members of his family and dependants, wins
great merit. That man who offers water to his guests for washing their
feet and hands, who presents the Arghya for honouring the recipient, who
duly gives seats, and beds, and lamps for lighting the darkness, and
shelter to those that come to his abode, is regarded as highly righteous.
That householder who rises at dawn and washes his mouth and 'face and
serves food to his guests, and having honoured them duly dismisses them
from his abode and follows them (as a mark of honour) for a little
distance, acquires eternal merit. Hospitality towards all, and the
pursuit of the aggregate of three, are the duties of the householder. The
duties of the Sudra consist in the pursuit of the aggregate of three. The
Religion ordained for the householder is said to have Pravritti for its
chief indication. Auspicious, and beneficial to all creatures, I shall
expound it to thee. The householder should always make gifts according to
the measure of his power. He should also perform sacrifices frequently
after the same manner. Indeed, he who wishes to achieve his own good
should always achieve meritorious acts. The householder, should acquire
wealth by righteous means. The wealth thus acquired should be carefully
divided into three portions, keeping the requirements of righteousness in
view. With one of those portions he should accomplish all acts of
righteousness. With another he should seek to gratify his cravings for
pleasure. The third portion he should lay out for increasing. The
Religion of Nivritti is different. It exists for emancipation (from
re-birth by absorption into Brahman). I shall tell thee the conduct that
constitutes it. Listen to me in detail, O goddess. One of the duties
inculcated by that religion is compassion towards all creatures. The man
that follows it should not reside in one place for more than one day.
Desirous of achieving emancipation, the followers of this Religion free
themselves from the bonds of hope (or desire). They have no attachment to
habitation, to the Kamandalu they bear for keeping water, to the robes
that cover their loins, or the seat whereupon they rest, or the triple
stick they bear in their hands, or the bed they sleep on, or the fire
they want, or the chamber that houses them. A follower of this Religion
sets his heart upon the workings of his soul. His mind is devoted to
Supreme Brahman. He is filled with the idea of attaining to Brahman. He
is always devoted to Yoga and the Sankhya Philosophy. He desires no other
shelter than the foot of a tree. He houses himself in empty abodes of
men. He sleeps on the banks of rivers. He takes pleasure in staying by
such banks. He is freed from every attachment, and from every tie of
affection. He merges the existence of his own soul into the Supreme Soul.
Standing like a stake of wood, and abstaining from all food he does only
such acts as point to Emancipation. Or, he may wander about, devoted to
Yoga. Even these are the eternal duties of a follower of the Religion of
Nivritti. He lives aloof from his species. He is freed from all
attachments. He never resides in the same place for more than a day.
Freed from all bonds he roves over the world. Emancipated from all ties,
he never sleeps on even the same river-bank for more than a day. Even
this is the religion of persons conversant with Emancipation as declared
in the Vedas. Even this is the righteous path that is trodden by the
righteous. He who follows in this track leaves no vestige behind.
Bhikshus (or followers of the religion of Emancipation) are of four
kinds. They are Kutichakas, Vahudakas, Hansas, and Paramahansas. The
second is superior to the first, the third to the second, and the fourth
to the third. There is nothing superior to the Paramahansa; nor is there
anything inferior to it or beside it or before it. It is a condition that
is divested of sorrow and happiness; that is auspicious and freed from
decrepitude and death and that knows no change.'[563]

"Uma said, 'Thou halt recited the religion of the householders, that of
Emancipation, and that which is based upon the observances of the
righteous. These paths are high and exceedingly beneficial to the world
of living creatures. O thou that art conversant with every religion, I
desire now to hear what is the high religion of the Rishis. I always have
a liking for those that dwell in ascetic retreats. The perfume that
emanates from the smoke of the libations of clarified butter poured on
the sacred fire seems to pervade the entire retreats and make them
delightful. Marking this, O great god, my heart becomes always filled
with delight. O puissant deity, I have doubts regarding the religion of
the ascetics. Thou art conversant with the details of all religions. Do
thou enlighten me, O god of gods, in detail, respecting this topic truly
about which I have asked thee, O great deity!'

"The blessed and holy one said, 'Yes, I shall recite to thee the high and
excellent religion of the ascetics. By following the dictates of that
religion, O auspicious lady, the ascetics attain to success through the
severe penances they practise. O highly blessed one, do thou hear, from
the beginning, what the duties are of those righteous Rishis that are
conversant with every duty and that are known by the name of Phenapas.
The Grandsire Brahma (during the days he devoted to the observance of
penances) drank some nectar (in the form of water). That water had flowed
in heaven from a great sacrifice. The froth of that water is highly
auspicious and (in consequence of Brahma's having drunk it) it partook of
His own nature. Those Rishis that subsist upon the measure of froth that
thus issued (from the water indicated) are called Phenapas
(Froth-eaters). Even this is the conduct of those pure-souled Rishis, O
lady, possessed of wealth of penances! Listen now to me as I explain to
thee who the Valkhilyas are. The Valkhilyas are ascetics that have won
success by their penances. They reside in the solar disc. Adopting the
means of subsistence that is followed by the birds, those Rishis,
conversant with every duty of righteousness, live according to the Unchha
mode. Their attire consists of deer-skins or barks of trees. Freed from
every pair of opposites, the Valkhilyas, possessed of wealth of penances,
walk in this track of righteousness. They are as big as a digit of the
thumb. Distributed into classes, each class lives in the practice of the
duties assigned to it. They desire only to practise penance. The merits
they win by their righteous conduct are very high. They are regarded as
having attained to an equality with the gods and exist for the
accomplishment of the purposes of the gods. Having burnt off all their
sins by severe penances, they blaze forth in effulgence, illuminating all
the points of the compass. Others, called Chakracharas, are endued with
cleansed souls and devoted to the practice of compassion. Righteous in
their conduct and possessed of great sanctity, they live in the region of
Soma. Thus residing near enough to the region of the Pitris, they duly
subsist by drinking the rays of Soma. There are others called
Samprakshalas and Asmkuttas and Dantolukhalas.[564] These live near the
Soma-drinking deities and others that drink flames of fire. With their
wedded spouses, and with passions under complete control, they too
subsist upon the rays of Soma. They pour libations of clarified butter on
the sacred fire, and adore the Pitris under proper forms. They also
perform the well-known sacrifices. Even this is said to constitute their
religion. The religion of the Rishis, O goddess, is always observed by
those who are houseless and who are free to rove through every region
including that of the gods. There are, again, other classes about whom I
shall speak presently. Do thou listen. It is necessary that they who
observe the different religions of the Rishis, should subjugate their
passions and know the Soul. Indeed, in my opinion, lust and wrath should
be completely conquered. With corn (wealth) acquired by the Unchha mode,
they should discharge the following duties, viz., the pouring of
libations on the sacred fire, occupying a fixed seat employing oneself
the while in the sacrifice called Dharmaratri, performance of she
Soma-sacrifice, acquisition of especial knowledge, the giving of
sacrificial presents which forms the fifth, the daily performance of
sacrifices, devotion to the worship of the Pitris and the deities,
hospitality towards all. Abstention from all luxurious viands prepared
from cow's milk, taking a pleasure in tranquillity of heart, lying on
bare rocks or the earth, devotion to Yoga, eating potherbs and leaves of
trees, and subsisting upon fruits and roots and wind and water and moss,
are some of the practices of the Rishis by which they attain to the end
that belongs to persons unsubjugated (by the world). When the smoke has
ceased to curl upwards from a house, when the husking machine has ceased
to ply, when the hearth-fire has been extinguished, when all the inmates
have taken their food, when dishes are no longer carried from room to
room, when mendicants have ceased to walk the streets, it is then that
the man who is devoted to the religion of truth and tranquillity of soul,
desiring to have a guest (but finding his desire ungratified), should eat
what remnant of food may still occur in the house. By acting in this way,
one becomes a practiser of the religion of the Munis. One should not be
arrogant, nor proud, nor cheerless and discontented; nor should one
wonder at anything. Indeed, one should behave equally towards friends and
foes. Verily, one who is the foremost of all persons conversant with
duties should also be friendly towards all creatures."



SECTION CXLII

"Uma said, 'Forest recluses reside in delightful regions, among the
springs and fountains of rivers, in bowers by the sides of streams and
rills, on hills and mountains, in woods and forests, and in sacred spots
full of fruits and roots. With concentrated attention and observant of
vows and rules, they dwell in such places. I desire, O Sankara, to hear
the sacred ordinances which they follow. These recluses, O god of all
gods, are persons that depend, for the protection of their bodies, upon
themselves alone.'[565]

Maheswara said, 'Do thou hear with concentrated attention what the duties
are of forest recluses. Having listened to them with one mind, O goddess,
do thou set thy heart upon righteousness. Listen then to what the acts
are that should be practised by righteous recluses crowned with success,
observant of rigid vows and rules, and residing in woods and forests.
Performing ablutions thrice a day, worshipping the Pitris and the
deities, pouring libations on the sacred fire, performing those
sacrifices and rites that go by the name of Ishti-homa, picking up the
grains of Nivara-paddy, eating fruit and roots, and using oil that is
pressed out from Inguda and castor-seeds are their duties. Having gone
through the practices of Yoga and become crowned with (ascetic) success
and freed from lust and wrath, they should seat themselves in the
attitude called Virasana. Indeed, they should reside in those places
which are inaccessible to cowards.[566] Observant of the excellent
ordinances relating to Yoga, sitting in summer in the midst of four fires
on four sides with the sun overhead, duly practising what is called
Manduka Yoga, and always seated in the attitude called Virasana, and
lying on bare rocks or the earth, these men, with hearts set upon
righteousness, must expose themselves to cold and water and fire. They
subsist upon water or air or moss. They use two pieces of stones only for
husking their corn. Some of them use their teeth only for such a purpose.
They do not keep utensils of any kind (for storing anything for the day
to come). Some of them clothe themselves with rags and barks of trees or
deer-skins. Even thus do they pass their lives for the measure of time
allotted to them, according to the ordinances (set forth in the
scriptures). Remaining in woods and forests, they wander within woods and
forests, live within them, and are always to be found within them.
Indeed, these forest recluses entering into woods and forests live within
them as disciples, obtaining a preceptor, live with him. The performance
of the rites of Homa is their duty, as also the observance of the five
sacrifices. A due observance of the rules about distribution (in respect
of time) of the fivefold sacrifices as laid down in the Vedas, devotion
to (other) sacrifices, forming the eighth, observance of the Chaturmasya,
performance of the Paurnamasya, and other sacrifices, and performance of
the daily sacrifices, are the duties of these men dissociated from wives,
freed from every attachment, and cleansed from every sin. Indeed, they
should live even thus in the forest. The sacrificial ladle and the
water-vessel are their chief wealth. They are always devoted to the three
fires. Righteous in their conduct and adhering to the path of virtue,
they attain to the highest end. These Munis, crowned with (ascetic)
success and ever devoted to the religion of Truth, attain to the highly
sacred region of Brahman or the eternal region of Soma. O auspicious
goddess, I have thus recited to thee, in brief, the outlines of the
religion that is followed by forest recluses and that has many practices
in detail.'

"Uma said, 'O holy one, O lord of all creatures, O thou that art
worshipped by all beings, I desire to hear what the religion is of those
Munis that are followers of the scriptures treating of ascetic success.
Do thou recite it to me. Residing in woods and forests and
well-accomplished in the scriptures of success, some amongst them live
and act as they like, without being restrained by particular practices;
others have wives. How, indeed, have their practices been laid down?'

"Mahadeva said, 'O goddess, the shaving of the head and the wearing of
the brown robes are the indications of those recluses that rove about in
freedom; while the indications of those that sport with wedded wives
consist in passing their nights at home. Performing ablutions there times
a day is the duty of the classes, while the Homa, with water and fruits
from the wilderness, belongs to the wedded recluses as performed by the
Rishis in general. Absorption, Yoga-meditation, and adherence to those
duties that constitute piety and that have been laid down as such (in the
scriptures and the Vedas) are some of the other duties prescribed for
them. All those duties also of which I have spoken to thee before as
appertaining to recluses residing in forests, are the duties of these
also. Indeed, if those duties are observed, they that observe them,
attain to the rewards that attach to severe penances. Those forest
recluses that lead wedded lives should confine the gratification of their
senses to these wedded wives of theirs. By indulging in sexual congress
with their wives at only those times when their seasons come, they
conform to the duties that have been laid down for them. The religion
which these virtuous men are to follow is the religion that has been laid
down and followed by the Rishis. With their eyes set upon the acquisition
of righteousness, they should never pursue any other object of desire
from a sense of unrestrained caprice. That man who makes the gift unto
all creatures of an assurance of perfect harmlessness or innocence, freed
as his soul becomes from the stain of malice or harmfulness, becomes
endued with righteousness. Verily, that person who shows compassion to
all creatures, who adopts as a vow a behaviour of perfect sincerity
towards al creatures, and who constitutes himself the soul of all
creatures, becomes endued with righteousness. A bath in all the Vedas,
and a behaviour of sincerity towards all creatures, are looked upon as
equal in point of merit; or, perhaps, the latter is a little
distinguished above the other in point of merit. Sincerity, it has been
said, is Righteousness; while insincerity or crookedness is the reverse.
That man who conducts himself with sincerity becomes endued with
Righteousness. The man who is always devoted to sincerity of behaviour,
succeeds in attaining to a residence among the deities. Hence, he who
wishes to achieve the merit of righteousness should become endued with
sincerity. Possessed of a forgiving disposition and of self-restraint,
and with wrath under complete subjection, one should transform oneself
into an embodiment of Righteousness and become freed from malice. Such a
man, who becomes devoted, besides, to the discharge of all the duties
Religion, becomes endued with the merit of Righteousness. Freed from
drowsiness and procrastination, the pious person, who adheres to the path
of Righteousness to the best of his power, and becomes possessed of pure
conduct, and who is venerable in years, comes to be regarded as equal to
Brahma himself.'

"Uma said. By what course of duties, O god, do those ascetics who are
attached to their respective retreats and possessed of wealth of
penances, succeed in becoming endued with great splendour? By what acts
again, do kings and princes who are possessed of great wealth, and others
who are destitute of wealth, succeed in obtaining high rewards? By what
acts, O god, do denizens of the forest succeed in attaining to that place
which is eternal and in adorning their persons with celestial
sandal-paste? O illustrious god of three eyes, O destroyer of the triple
city, do thou dispel this doubt of mine connected with the auspicious
subject of the observance of penances by telling everything in detail.'

"The illustrious deity said, 'Those who observe the vows relating to
fasts and restrain their senses, who abstain from injury of any kind to
any creature, and who practise truthfulness of speech, attain to success
and ascending to Heaven sport in felicity with the Gandharvas as their
companions, freed from every kind of evil. The righteous souled man who
lies down in the attitude which appertains to Manduka-Yoga, and who
properly and according to the ordinance performs meritorious acts after
having taken the Diksha, sports in felicity in the next world in the
company of the Nagas. That man who lives in the company of deer and
subsists upon such grass and vegetables as fall off from their mouths,
and who has undergone the Diksha and attends to the duties attached to
it, succeeds in attaining to Amaravati (the mansions of Indra). That man
who subsists upon the moss he gathers and the fallen leaves of trees that
he picks up, and endures all the severities of cold, attains to very high
place. That man who subsists upon either air or water, or fruits and
roots, attains in after life to the affluence that belongs to the Yakshas
and sports in felicity in the company of diverse tribes of Apsaras.
Having practised for two and ten years, according to the rites laid down
in the ordinances, the vow relating to the endurance of the five fires in
the summer season, one becomes in one's next life a king. That man who,
having observed vows with respect to food, practises penances for two and
twelve years, carefully abstaining from all interdicted food, taken at
forbidden hours, during the periods becomes in his next life a ruler of
earth.[567] That man who sits and lies on the bare ground with the cope
of the firmament alone for his shelter, observes the course of duties
that attach to Diksha, and then casts off his body by abstaining from all
food, attains to great felicity in Heaven. The rewards of one who sits
and lies down upon the bare ground (with the welkin alone for his
shelter) are said to be excellent vehicles and beds, and costly mansions
possessed of the resplendence of the moon, O lady! That man who, having
subsisted upon abstemious diet and observed diverse excellent vows, lives
depending upon his own self and then casts off his body by abstaining
from all food, succeeds in ascending to heaven and enjoying all its
felicity. That man who, having lived in entire dependence upon his own
self, observes for two and ten years the duties that appertain to Diksha,
and at last casts off his body on the great ocean, succeeds in attaining
to the regions of Varuna after death. That man who, living in entire
dependence upon his own self observes the duties that attach to Diksha
for two and ten years, and pierces his own feet with a sharp stone,
attains to the felicity of the region that belongs to the Guhyakas. He
who cultivates self with the aid of self, who frees himself from the
influence of all pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold, joy and
sorrow, etc), who is freed from every kind of attachment, and who
mentally observes for two and ten years such a course of conduct after
Diksha, attains to Heaven and enjoys every happiness with the deities as
his companions. He who lives in entire dependence upon his own self and
observes for two and ten years the duties that attach to Diksha and
finally casts off his body on the fire as an oblation to the deities,
attains to the regions of Brahman and is held in high respect there. That
regenerate man, O goddess, who having properly gone through the Diksha
keeps his senses under subjugation, and placing his Self on Self frees
himself from the sense of meum, desirous of achieving righteousness, and
sets out, without a covering for his body, after the due observance of
the duties of Diksha for two and ten years and after having placed his
sacred fire on a tree, and walks along the path that belongs to heroes
and lies down (when need for lying down comes) in the attitude of heroes,
and conducts himself always after the manner of heroes, certainly attains
to the end that is reserved for heroes.[568] Such a man repairs to the
eternal region of Sakra where he becomes crowned with the fruition of all
his wishes and where he sports in joy, his person decked with garlands of
celestial flowers and celestial perfumes. Indeed, that righteous souled
person lives happily in Heaven, with the deities as his companions. The
hero, observant of the practices of heroes and devoted to that Yoga which
belongs to heroes, living in the practice of Goodness, having renounced
everything, having undergone the Diksha and subjugated his senses, and
observing purity of both body and mind, is sure to attain to that path
which is reserved for heroes. Eternal regions of happiness are his.
Riding on a car that moves at the will of the rider, he roves through all
those happy regions as he likes. Indeed, dwelling in the region of Sakra,
that blessed person always sports in joy, freed from every calamity."



SECTION CXLIII

"Uma said, 'O holy one, O thou that didst tear off the eyes of Bhaga and
the teeth of Pushan, O destroyer of the sacrifice of Daksha, O three-eyed
deity, I have a great doubt. In days of yore, the Self-born One created
the four orders. Through the evil consequence of what acts cloth a Vaisya
become a Sudra? Through what acts doth a Kshatriya become a Vaisya and a
regenerate person (Brahmana) becomes a Kshatriya? By what means may such
degradation of castes be prevented? Through what acts does a Brahmana
take birth in his next life, in the Sudra order? Through what acts, O
puissant deity, does a Kshatriya also descend to the status of Sudra? O
sinless one, O lord of all created beings, do thou, O illustrious one,
dispel this doubt of mine. How, again, can the three other orders
naturally succeed in attaining to the status of Brahmanhood?'

"The illustrious one said, 'The status of a Brahmana, O goddess, is
exceedingly difficult to attain. O auspicious lady, one becomes a
Brahmana through original creation or birth. After the same manner the
Kshatriya, the Vaisya, and the Sudra, all become so through original
creation. Even this is my opinion[569]. He, however, that is born a
Brahmana falls away from his status through his own evil acts. Hence, the
Brahmana, after having attained to the status of the first order, should
always protect it (by his acts). If one, who is a Kshatriya or Vaisya,
lives in the practice of those duties that are assigned to the Brahmana,
after the manner of a Brahmana he becomes (in his next life) a Brahmana.
That Brahmana who casts off the duties of his order for following those
assigned for the Kshatriya, is regarded as one that has fallen away from
the status of a Brahmana and that has become a Kshatriya. That Brahmana
of little understanding, who, impelled by cupidity and folly, follows the
practices assigned to Vaisyas forgetful of his status as a Brahmana that
is exceedingly difficult to attain, comes to be regarded as one that has
become a Vaisya. Similarly, one that is a Vaisya by birth may, by
following the practices of a Sudra, become a Sudra. Indeed, a Brahmana,
falling away from the duties of his own order, may descend to the status
of even a Sudra, Such a Brahmana, falling away from the order of his
birth and turned out of it, without attaining to the region of Brahmana
(which is his goal if he duly observes his own duties), sinks into Hell
and in his next birth becomes born as a Sudra. A highly blessed Kshatriya
or a Vaisya, that abandons those practices of his that are consistent
with the duties laid down for his order, and follows the practices laid
down for the Sudra, falls away from his own order and becomes a person of
mixed caste. It is in this way that a Brahmana. or a Kshatriya, or a
Vaisya, sinks into the status of a Sudra. That man who has attained to
clearness of vision through practice of the duties of his own order, who
is endued with knowledge and science, who is pure (in body and mind), who
is conversant with every duty and devoted to the practice of all his
duties, is sure to enjoy the rewards of righteousness. I shall now recite
to thee, O goddess, a saying uttered by Brahma (the Self-born) on this
subject. Those that are righteous and desirous of acquiring merit always
pursue with firmness the culture of the soul. The food that comes from
cruel and fierce persons is censurable. So also is the food that has been
cooked for serving a large number of persons. The same is said of the
food that is cooked in view of the first Sraddha of a deceased person. So
also is the food that is stained in consequence of the usual faults and
the food that is supplied by a Sudra. These should never be taken by a
Brahmana at any time[570]. The food of a Sudra, O goddess, is always
disapproved of by the high-souled deities. Even this, I think, is the
authority enunciated by the Grandsire with his own mouth. If a Brahmana,
who has set up the sacred fire and who performs sacrifices, were to die
with any portion of a Sudra's food remaining undigested in his stomach,
he is sure to take birth in his next life as a Sudra. In consequence of
those remains of a Sudra's food in his stomach, he falls away from the
status of a Brahmana. Such a Brahmana becomes invested with the status of
a Sudra. There is no doubt in this. This Brahmana in his next life
becomes invested with the status of that order upon whose food he
subsists through life or with the undigested portion of whose food in his
stomach he breathes his last.[571] That man who, having attained to the
auspicious status of a Brahmana which is so difficult to acquire,
disregards it and eats interdicted food, falls away from his high status.
That Brahmana who drinks alcohol, who becomes guilty of Brahmanicide or
mean in his behaviour, or a thief, or who breaks his vows, or becomes
impure, or unmindful of his Vedic studies, or sinful, or characterised by
cupidity, or guilty of cunning or cheating, or who does not observe vows,
or who weds a Sudra woman, or who derives his subsistence by pandering to
the lusts of other people or who sells the Soma plant, or who serves a
person of an order below his, falls away from his status of
Brahmanahood.[572] That Brahmana who violates the bed of his preceptor,
or who cherishes malice towards him, or who takes pleasure in speaking
ill of him, falls away from the status of Brahmanahood even if he be
conversant with Brahman. By these good acts, again, O goddess, when
performed, a Sudra becomes a Brahmana, and a Vaisya becomes a Kshatriya.
The Sudra should perform all the duties laid down for him, properly and
according to the ordinance. He should always wait, with obedience and
humility, upon person of the three other orders and serve them with care.
Always adhering to the path of righteousness, the Sudra should cheerfully
do all this. He should honour the deities and persons of the regenerate
orders. He should observe the vow of hospitality to all persons. With
senses kept under subjection and becoming abstemious in food, he should
never approach his wife except in her season. He should ever search after
persons that are holy and pure. As regards food, he should eat that which
remains after the needs of all persons have been satisfied. If, indeed,
the Sudra desires to be a Vaisya (in his next life), he should also
abstain from meat of animals not slain in sacrifices. If a Vaisya wishes
to be a Brahmana (in his next life), he should observe even these duties.
He should be truthful in speech, and free from pride or arrogance. He
should rise superior to all pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold,
joy and sorrow, etc.) He should be observant of the duties of peace and
tranquillity. He should adore the deities in sacrifices, attend with
devotion to the study and recitation of the Vedas, and become pure in
body and mind. He should keep his senses under subjection, honour the
Brahmanas, and seek the welfare of all the orders. Leading the domestic
mode of life and eating only twice a day at the prescribed hours he
should gratify his hunger with only such food as remains after the needs
have been satisfied of all the members of his family with dependants and
guests. He should be abstemious in food, and act without being impelled
by the desire of reward. He should be free from egotism. He should adore
the deities in the Agnihotra and pour libations according to the
ordinance. Observing the duties of hospitality towards all persons, he
should, as already said, eat the food that remains after serving all
others for whom it has been cooked. He should, according to the ordinance
laid down, worship the three fires. Such a Vaisya of pure conduct takes
birth in his next life in a high Kshatriya family.[573] If a Vaisya,
after having taken birth as a Kshatriya, goes through the usual
purificatory rites, becomes invested with the sacred thread, and betakes
himself to the observance of vows, he becomes, in his next life, an
honoured Brahmana. Indeed, after his birth as a Kshatriya, he should make
presents, adore the deities in great sacrifices with plentiful Dakshinas,
study the Vedas, and desirous of attaining to Heaven should worship the
three fires. He should interfere for dispelling the sorrows of the
distressed, and should always righteously cherish and protect those
subjects that own his sway. He should be truthful, and do all acts that
have truth in them, and seek happiness in conduct like this. He should
award punishments that are righteous, without laying aside the rod of
chastisement for good. He should induce men to do righteous deeds. Guided
by considerations of policy (in the matter of swaying his people), he
should take a sixth of the produce of the fields.[574] He should never
indulge in sexual pleasure, but live cheerfully and in independence,
well-conversant with the science of Wealth or Profit. Of righteous soul,
he should seek his wedded spouse only in her season. He should always
observe fasts, keep his soul under control, devote himself to the study
of the Vedas, and be pure in body and mind. He should sleep on blades of
Kusa grass spread out in his fire, chamber. He should pursue the
aggregate of Three (viz., Righteousness, Wealth, and Pleasure), and be
always cheerful. Unto Sudras desirous of food, he should always answer
that it is ready. He should never desire any thing from motives of gain
or pleasure. He should worship the Pitris and gods and guests. In his own
house he should live the life of a mendicant. He should duly adore the
deities in his Agnihotra, morning, noon, and evening every day, by
pouring libations agreeably to the ordinance. With his face turned
towards the foe, he should cast off his life-breath in battle fought for
the benefit of kine and Brahmanas. Or he may enter the triple fires
sanctified with Mantras and cast off his body. By pursuing this line of
conduct he takes birth in his next life as a Brahmana. Endued with
knowledge and science, purified from all dross, and fully conversant with
the Vedas, a pious Kshatriya, by his own acts, becomes a Brahmana. It is
with the aid of these acts, O goddess, that a person who has sprung from
a degraded order, viz., a Sudra, may become a Brahmana refined of all
stains and possessed of Vedic lore, One that is a Brahmana, when he
becomes wicked in conduct and observes no distinction in respect of food,
falls away from the status of Brahmanahood and becomes a Sudra. Even a
Sudra, O goddess, that has purified his soul by pure deeds and that has
subjugated all his senses, deserves to be waited upon and served with
reverence as a Brahmana. This has been said by the Self-born Brahmana
himself. When a pious nature and pious deeds are noticeable in even a
Sudra, he should, according to my opinion, be held superior to a person
of the three regenerate classes. Neither birth, nor the purificatory
rites, nor learning, nor offspring, can be regarded as grounds for
conferring upon one the regenerate status. Verily, conduct is the only
ground. All Brahmanas in this world are Brahmanas in consequence of
conduct. A Sudra, if he is established on good conduct, is regarded as
possessed of the status of a Brahmana. The status of Brahma, O auspicious
lady, is equal wherever it exists. Even this is my opinion. He, indeed,
is a Brahmana in whom the status of Brahma exists,--that condition which
is bereft of attributes and which has no stain attached to it. The
boon-giving Brahma, while he created all creatures, himself said that the
distribution of human beings into the four orders dependent on birth is
only for purposes of classification. The Brahmana is a great field in
this world,--a field equipped with feet for it moves from place to place.
He who plants seeds in that field, O beautiful lady, reaps the crop in
the next world. That Brahmana who wishes to achieve his own good should
always live upon the remains of the food that may be there in his house
after gratifying the needs of all others. He should always adhere to the
path of righteousness. Indeed, he should tread along the path that
belongs to Brahma. He should live engaged in the study of the Samhitas
and remaining at home he should discharge all the duties of a
householder. He should always be devoted to the study of the Vedas, but
he should never derive the means of subsistence from such study. That
Brahmana who always conducts himself thus, adhering to the path of
righteousness, worshipping his sacred fire, and engaged in the study of
the Vedas, comes to be regarded as Brahma. The status of a Brahmana once
gained, it should always be protected with care, O thou of sweet smiles,
by avoiding the stain of contact with persons born in inferior orders,
and by abstaining from the acceptance of gifts. I have thus told thee a
mystery, viz., the manner in which a Sudra may become a Brahmana, or that
by which a Brahmana falls away from his own pure status and becomes a
Sudra."



SECTION CXLIV

"Uma said, 'O holy one, O Lord of all beings, O thou that art worshipped
by the deities and Asuras equally, tell me what are the duties and
derelictions of men. Indeed, O puissant one, resolve my doubts. It is by
these three, viz., thought, word, and deed, that men become bound with
bonds. It is by these same three that they become freed from those bonds.
By pursuing what conduct, O god,--indeed, by what kind of acts,--by what
behaviour and attributes and words, do men succeed in ascending to
heaven?'

"The god of gods said, 'O goddess, thou art well-conversant with the true
import of duties. Thou art ever devoted to righteousness and
self-restraint. The question thou hast asked me is fraught with the
benefit of all creatures. It enhances the intelligence of all persons. Do
thou, therefore, listen to the answer. Those persons that are devoted to
the religion of Truth, that are righteous and destitute of the
indications of the several modes of life, and that enjoy the wealth
earned by righteous means, succeed in ascending to heaven. Those men that
are freed from all doubts, that are possessed of omniscience, and that
have eyes to behold all things, are never enchained by either virtue or
sin. Those men that are freed from all attachments can never be bound by
the chains of action. They who never injure others in thought, word, or
deed, and who never attach themselves to anything, can never be bound by
acts. They who abstain from taking the lives of any creature, who are
pious in conduct, who have compassion, who regard friends and foes in an
equal light and who are self-restrained, can never be bound by acts.
Those men that are endued with compassion towards all beings, that
succeed in inspiring the confidence of all living creatures, and that
have cast off malice in their behaviour, succeed in ascending to heaven.
Those men that have no desire to appropriate what belongs to others, that
keep themselves aloof from the wedded wives of others, and that enjoy
only such wealth as has been earned by righteous means, succeed in
ascending to heaven. Those men who behave towards the wives of other
people as towards their own mothers and sisters and daughters, succeed in
attaining to heaven. Those men that abstain from appropriating what
belongs to others, that are perfectly contented with what they possess,
and that live depending upon their own destiny, succeed in ascending to
heaven. Those men that, in their conduct, always shut their eyes against
association with other people's spouses, that are masters of their
senses, and that are devoted to righteous conduct, succeed in ascending
to heaven. Even this is the path, created by the gods, that the righteous
should follow. This is the path, freed from passion and aversion, laid
down for the righteous to follow. Those men who are devoted to their own
spouses and who seek them only in their seasons, and who turn themselves
away from indulgence in sexual pleasure, succeed in ascending to Heaven
Conduct marked by charity and penances, and characterised by
righteousness of deeds and purity of both body and heart, should be
followed by those that are wise for the sake of adding to their merit or
for earning their means of subsistence. Those who wish to ascend to
Heaven should follow in this track and not in any other.'

"Uma said, 'Tell me, O illustrious deity, O sinless lord of all
creatures, what are those words by which one becomes enchained and what
are those words by uttering which one may be freed from one's bonds.'

"Maheswara said, 'Those men who never tell lies for either themselves or
for others, or in jest or for exciting laughter, succeed in ascending to
Heaven. They who never tell lies for earning their subsistence or for
earning merit or through mere caprice, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
They who utter words that are smooth and sweet and faultless, and who
welcome all whom they meet with sincerity, succeed in ascending to
Heaven. They who never utter words that are harsh and bitter and cruel.
and who are free from deceitfulness and evil of every kind, succeed in
ascending to Heaven. Those men who never utter words that are fraught
with deceit or that cause breach of understanding between friends, and
who always speak what is true and what promotes good feelings, succeed in
ascending to Heaven. Those men who avoid harsh speeches and abstain from
quarrels with others, who are impartial in their behaviour to all
creatures, and who have subjugated their souls, succeed in ascending to
Heaven. They who abstain from evil speech or sinful conversation, who
avoid such speeches as are disagreeable, and who utter only such words as
are auspicious and agreeable, succeed in ascending to Heaven. They who
never utter, under anger, such words as tear the hearts of other people,
and who, even when under the influence of wrath, speak words that are
peaceful and agreeable, succeed in ascending to Heaven. The religion, O
goddess, appertaining to speech, should always be followed by men. It is
auspicious and characterised by truth. They that are possessed of wisdom
should always avoid untruth.'

"Uma said, 'Do thou tell me, O god of gods, O wielder of Pinaka, O thou
that art highly blessed, what those mental acts or thoughts are by which
a person may be enchained.'

"Maheswara said, 'Endued with merit that arises from mental acts, O
goddess, one ascends to Heaven. Listen to me, O auspicious one, as I
recite to thee what those acts are. Listen to me, O thou of sweet face,
how also a mind of ill-regulated features becomes enchained by
ill-regulated or evil thoughts. Those men who do not seek even mentally,
to take what belongs to others even when they see it lying in a lone
forest, succeed in ascending to Heaven. Those men who care not to
appropriate what belongs to others even when they see it lying in a house
or a village that has been deserted, ascend to Heaven. Those men that do
not seek, even mentally, to associate with the wedded spouses of others
even when they behold them in deserted places and under the influence of
desire, succeed in ascending to Heaven. Those men who, meeting with
friends or foes, behave in the same friendly way towards all, succeed in
ascending to Heaven. Those men that are possessed of learning and
compassion, that are pure in body and mind, that are firm in their
adherence to truth, and that are contented with what belongs to them,
succeed in ascending to Heaven. Those men that do not bear ill-will to
any creature, that do not stand in need of labour for their subsistence,
that bear friendly hearts towards all beings, and that entertain
compassion towards all, succeed in ascending to Heaven. Those men that
are endued with faith, that have compassion, that are holy, that seek the
company of holy men, and that are conversant with the distinctions
between right and wrong, succeed in ascending to Heaven. Those men, O
goddess, that are conversant with what the consequences are of good and
bad deeds, succeed in ascending to Heaven. Those men that are just in all
their dealings, that are endued with all desirable accomplishments, that
are devoted to the deities and the Brahmanas, and that are endued with
perseverance in the doing of good acts, succeed in ascending to Heaven.
All these men, O goddess, succeed in ascending to Heaven through the
meritorious consequences of their deeds. What else dost thou wish to
hear?'

"Uma said, 'I have a great doubt, O Maheswara, on a subject connected
with human beings. It behoveth thee to explain it to me carefully. By
what acts does a man succeed, O puissant deity, in acquiring a long life?
By what penances also does one acquire a long life? By what acts does one
become shortlived on earth? O thou that art perfectly stainless, it
behoveth thee to tell me what the consequences are of acts (in the matter
of bestowing a long or a short life on the doer). Some are seen to be
possessed of great good fortune and some weighted with misfortune. Some
are of noble birth while others of ignoble birth. Some are of such
repulsive features as if they are made of wood, while others are of very
agreeable features at even the first sight. Some appear to be destitute
of wisdom while others are possessed of it. Some, again, are seen endued
with high intelligence and wisdom, enlightened by knowledge and science.
Some have to endure little pain, while others there are that are weighted
with heavy calamities. Even such diverse sights are seen with respect to
men. It behoveth thee, O illustrious one, to tell me the reason of all
this.'

"The god of gods said, 'Verily, O goddess, I shall discourse to thee on
the manifestation of the fruits of acts. It is by the rules of that
manifestation that all human beings in this world enjoy or endure the
consequences of their acts. That man who assumes a fierce aspect for the
purpose of taking the lives of other creatures, who arms himself with
stout sticks for injuring other creatures, who is seen with uplifted
weapons, who slays living creatures, who is destitute of compassion, who
always causes agitation to living beings, who refuses to grant protection
to even worms and ants, who is endued with cruelty,--one who is such, O
goddess, sinks in Hell. One who is endued with an opposite disposition
and who is righteous in acts, is born as a handsome man. The man who is
endued with cruelty, goes to Hell, while he that is endued with
compassion ascends to Heaven. The man who goes to Hell has to endure
excruciating misery. One who, having sunk in Hell, rises therefrom, take
birth as a man endued with short life. That man who is addicted to
slaughter and injury, O goddess, becomes, through his sinful deeds,
liable to destruction. Such a person becomes disagreeable to all
creatures and endued with a short life. That man who belongs to what is
called the White class, who abstains from the slaughter of living
creatures, who has thrown away all weapons, who never inflicts any
chastisement on any body, who never injures any creatures, who never
causes any body to slay creatures for him, who never slays or strikes
even when struck or attempted to be slain, who never sanctions or
approves an act of slaughter, who is endued with compassion towards all
creatures, who behaves towards others as towards his own self,--such a
superior man, O goddess, succeeds in attaining to the status of a deity.
Filled with joy, such a man enjoys diverse kinds of luxurious articles.
If such a person ever takes birth in the world of men, he becomes endued
with longevity and enjoys great happiness. Even this is the way of those
that are of righteous conduct and righteous deeds and that are blessed
with longevity, the way that was indicated by the Self-born Brahman
himself and that is characterised by abstention from the slaughter of
living creatures.'"



SECTION CXLV

"Uma said, 'By what disposition, what conduct, what acts, and what gifts,
does a man succeed in attaining to Heaven?'

"Maheswara said, 'He who is endued with a liberal disposition, who
honours Brahmanas and treats them with hospitality, who makes gifts of
food and drink and robes and other articles of enjoyment unto the
destitute, the blind, and the distressed, who makes gifts of houses,
erects halls (for use of the public), digs wells, constructs shelters
whence pure and cool water is distributed (during the hot months unto
thirsty travellers), excavates tanks, makes arrangements for the free
distribution of gifts every day, gives to all seekers what each solicits,
who makes gifts of seats and beds and conveyances, wealth, jewels and
gems, houses, all kinds of corn, kine, fields, and women,--verily, he who
always makes these gifts with a cheerful heart, becomes a denizen, O
goddess, of Heaven. He resides there for a long period, enjoying diverse
kinds of superior articles. Passing his time happily in the company of
the Apsaras, he sports in the woods of Nandana and other delightful
regions. After the exhaustion of his merits he falls down from Heaven and
takes birth in the order of humanity, in a family, O goddess, that is
possessed of wealth in abundance and that has a large command of every
article of enjoyments. In that life he becomes endued with all articles
for gratifying his wishes and appetites. Indeed, blessed with the
possession of such articles, he becomes endued with affluence and a
well-filled treasury. The self-born Brahman himself declared it in days
of old that it is even such persons, O goddess, that become highly
blessed and possessed of liberal dispositions and agreeable features.
There are others, O goddess, that are incapable of making gifts. Endued
with small understandings, they cannot make gifts even when solicited by
Brahmanas and possessed of abundant wealth. Beholding the destitute, the
blind, the distressed, and mendicants, and even guests arrived at their
abodes, those persons, always filled with the desire of gratifying the
organ of taste, turn away, even when expressly solicited by them. They
never make gifts of wealth or robes, or viands, or gold, or kine, or any
kind of food. Those men who are disinclined to relieve the distress of
others, who are full of cupidity, who have no faith in the scriptures,
and who never make gifts,--verily, these men of little understanding, O
goddess, have to sink in Hell. In course of time, when their sufferings
in Hell come to an end, they take birth in the order of humanity, in
families that are entirely destitute of wealth. Always suffering from
hunger and thirst, excluded from all decent society, hopeless of ever
enjoying good things, they lead lives of great wretchedness. Born in
families that are destitute of all articles of enjoyment, these men never
succeed in enjoying the good things of the world. Indeed, O goddess, it
is through their acts that persons become wretched and poor. There are
others who are full of arrogance and pride caused by the possession of
riches. Those senseless wretches never offer seats to those that deserve
such an offer. Endued with little understandings they do not give way to
them that deserve such an honour.[575] Nor do they give water for washing
the feet to persons unto whom it should be given. Indeed, they do not
honour, agreeably to the ordinance, with gifts of the Arghya, such
persons as deserve to be honoured therewith. They do not offer water for
washing the mouth unto such as deserve to have that honour. They do not
treat their very preceptors, when the latter arrive at their houses, in
the manner in which preceptors should be treated. Living in cupidity and
arrogance, they refuse to treat their seniors and aged men with love and
affection, even insulting those that deserve to be honoured and asserting
their superiority over them without showing reverence and humility. Such
men, O goddess, sink in Hell. When their sufferings come to an end after
a long course of years, they rise from Hell, and take birth in the order
of humanity, in low and wretched families. Indeed. they who humiliate
their preceptors and seniors, have to take their birth in such castes as
those of Swapakas and Pukkasas who are exceedingly vile and bereft of
intelligence. He who is not arrogant or filled with pride, who is a
worshipper of the deities and Brahmanas, who enjoys the respect of the
world, who bows to every one that deserves his reverence, who utters
smooth and sweet words, who benefits persons of all orders, who is always
devoted to the good of all beings, who does not feel aversion for
anybody, who is sweet-tongued, who is an utterer of agreeable and cooling
words, who gives way to one that deserves to have way, who adores his
preceptors in the manner in which preceptors deserve to be adored, who
welcomes all creatures with proper courtesy, who does not hear ill will
towards any creature, who lives, worshipping seniors and guests with such
honours as they deserve, who is ever bent upon securing as many guests as
possible, and who worships all who honour his house with their presence,
succeeds, O goddess, in ascending to Heaven. Upon the exhaustion of his
merit, he takes birth in the order of humanity in a high and respectable
family. In that life he becomes possessed of all articles of enjoyment in
abundance and jewels and gems and every kind of wealth in profusion. He
gives unto deserving persons what they deserve. He becomes devoted to the
observance of every duty and every act of righteousness. Honoured by all
creatures and receiving their reverence, he obtains the fruits of his own
acts. Even such a person acquires a high lineage and birth in this world.
This that I have recited to thee was said by the Ordainer (Brahman)
himself in days of old. That man who is fierce in conduct, who inspires
terror in all creatures, who injures other beings with hands or feet or
cords or sticks, or brick-bats or clods of hard clay, or other means of
wounding and paining, O beautiful lady, who practises diverse kinds of
deceit for slaying living creatures or vexing them, who pursues animals
in the chase and causes them to tremble in fear,--verily, that man, who
conducts himself in this way, is certain to sink in Hell. If in course of
time he takes birth in the order of humanity, he is obliged to be born in
a low and wretched race or family that is afflicted with impediments of
every kind on every side. He becomes an object of aversion to all the
world. Wretched among men, he becomes so through the consequence of his
own acts. Another, who is possessed of compassion, casts his eye on all
creatures. Endued with a friendly vision, behaving towards all creatures
as if he were their father, divested of every hostile feeling, with all
his passions under complete control, he never vexes any creature and
never inspires them with fear by means of his hands or feet which are
always under his control. He inspires the confidence of all beings. He
never afflicts any creature with either cords or clubs or brick-bats or
clods of hard earth or weapons of any kind. His deeds are never fierce or
cruel, and he is full of kindness. One who is endued with such practices
and conduct certainly ascend to Heaven. There he lives like a god in a
celestial mansion abounding with every comfort. If, upon the exhaustion
of his merit, he has to take birth in the order of humanity, he becomes
born as a man that has not to fight with difficulties of any kind or to
encounter any fear. Indeed, he enjoys great happiness. Possessed of
felicity, without the obligation of undergoing distressing labour for his
subsistence, he lives freed from every kind of anxiety. Even this, O
goddess, is the path of the righteous. In it there are no impediments or
afflictions.'

"Uma said, 'In the world some men are seen well-versed in inferences and
the premises leading to them. Indeed, they are possessed of science and
knowledge, have large progeny, and are endued with learning and wisdom.
Others, O god, are destitute of wisdom, science, and knowledge, and are
characterised by folly. By what particular acts does a person become
possessed of wisdom? By what acts, again, does one become possessed of
little wisdom and distorted vision? Do thou dispel this doubt of mine, O
thou that art the foremost of all beings conversant with duties. Others
there are, O god, that are blind from the moment of their birth. Others
there are that are diseased and afflicted and impotent. Do thou, O god,
tell me the reason of this.'

"Maheswara said, 'Those men that always enquire, about what is for their
benefit and what is to their detriment, Brahmanas learned in the Vedas,
crowned with success, and conversant with all duties, that avoid all
kinds of evil deeds and achieve only such deeds as are good, succeed in
ascending to Heaven after departing from this world and enjoy great
happiness as long as they live here. Indeed, upon the exhaustion of their
merit when they take birth in the order of humanity, they become born as
men possessed of great intelligence. Every kind of felicity and
auspiciousness becomes theirs in consequence of that intelligence with
which they are born. Those men of foolish understandings who cast wicked
eyes upon the wedded spouses of other men, become cursed with congenital
blindness in consequence of that sinfulness of theirs. Those men who,
impelled by desire in their hearts, cast their eyes on naked women, those
men of wicked deeds take birth in this world to pass their whole lives in
one continuous disease. Those men of foolish and wicked deeds who indulge
in sexual congress with women of orders different from their own,--those
men of little wisdom,--have to take birth in their next lives as persons
destitute of virility. Those men who cause animals to be slain, and those
who violate the beds of their preceptors, and those who indulge
promiscuously in sexual congress, have to take birth in their next lives
as persons destitute of the virile power.'

"Uma said, 'What acts, O foremost of the deities, are faulty, and what
acts are faultless? What, indeed, are those acts by doing which a man
succeeds in attaining to what is for your highest good?'

"Maheswara said, 'That man who is desirous of ascertaining what is
righteousness, and who wishes to acquire prominent virtues and
accomplishments, and who always puts questions to the Brahmanas with a
view to find out the path that leads to his highest good, succeed in
ascending to Heaven. If (after exhaustion of his merit) he takes birth in
the order of humanity, he becomes endued with intelligence and memory and
great wisdom. This, O goddess, is the line of conduct that the righteous
are to follow and that is fraught with great benefit. I have told thee of
it for the good of human beings.'

"Uma said, 'There are men who hate righteousness and who are possessed of
little understanding. They never wish to approach Brahmanas conversant
with the Vedas. There are others who are observant of vows and who are
devoted to the duty of performing Sraddhas. Others, again, are destitute
of all vows. They are unmindful of observance and are like Rakshasas in
conduct. Some there are who are devoted to the performance of sacrifices
and some who are unmindful of the Homa. Through the consequences of what
acts do men become possessed of These different natures?'

"Maheswara said, 'Through the Vedas, the limits have been assigned of all
the acts of human beings. Those men that conduct themselves according to
the authority of the Vedas, are seen (in their next lives) to become
devoted to the observance of vows. Those men, however, who having become
subject to the sway of folly accept unrighteousness for its reverse,
become destitute of vows, transgress all restraints, and come to be
regarded as Brahmarakshasas. Indeed, it is these men that become
unmindful of the Homa, that never utter the Vashat and other sacred
Mantras, and that come to be regarded as the lowest and vilest of men
Thus, O goddess, have I explained to thee the entire ocean of duties in
respect of human beings for the sake of removing thy doubts, not omitting
the sins of which they become guilty.'"



SECTION CXLVI

"Narada said, 'Having said these words, the puissant Mahadeva himself
became desirous of hearing (instead of talking), and with that view he
questioned his dear spouse who was seated by his side and she was fully
inclined to act up to his desire.'

"Mahadeva said, 'Thou, O goddess, art conversant with what is Supreme and
what is not.[576] Thou art acquainted with all duties, O thou that lovest
to reside in the retreats of ascetics. Thou art endued with every virtue,
possessed of beautiful eyebrows and hair ending in the fairest curls, O
daughter of Himavat, the king of mountains! Thou art skilled in every
work. Thou art endued with self-restraint and thou lookest impartially
upon all creatures. Divested of the sense of meum, thou art devoted to
the practice of all the duties. O thou of beautiful features, I desire to
ask thee about something. I wish that, asked by me, thou wilt discourse
to me on that topic. Savitri is the chaste wife of Brahma. The chaste
Sachi is the wife of Indra. Dhumrorna is the spouse of Markandeya, and
Riddhi of (king) Vaisravana. Varuna has Gauri for his spouse, and Surya
has Suvarchala. Rohini is the chaste wife of Sasin, and Swaha of
Vibhavasu. Kasyapa has Aditi. All these regard their husbands as their
gods. Thou hast, O goddess, conversed and associated with all of them
every day. It is for this reason, O thou that art conversant with every
duty, that I desire to question thee about the duties of women, O thou
whose words are always consistent with righteousness. I desire to hear
thee discourse on that subject from the beginning. Thou practisest all
the duties of righteousness with me. Thy conduct is exactly like mine,
and the vows thou observest are the same that are observed by me. Thy
puissance and energy are equal to mine, and thou hast undergone the
austerest penances. The subject, when discoursed upon by thee, will
become endued with great merit. Indeed, that discourse will then become
authoritative in the world. Women, in especial, are the highest refuge of
women. O thou of beautiful hips, among human beings that course of
conduct which thou wilt lay down will be followed from generation to
generation.[577] Half of my body is made up of half thy body. Thou art
always engaged in doing the work of the deities, and it is thou that art
the cause of the peopling of the earth, O auspicious lady, all the
eternal duties of women are well-known to thee. Do thou, therefore, tell
me in detail what are the duties of thy sex.'

"Uma said, 'O holy one, O lord of all created things, O source of all
that is past, present, and future, it is through thy grace that the words
I am uttering are taking their rise in my mind. All these Rivers (that
are of my sex), O god of gods, endued with the waters of all the Tirthas,
are approaching thy presence for enabling thee to perform thy ablutions
in them.[578] After consulting them I shall discourse on the topic named,
in due order. That person who, though competent, is still free from
egotism, is rightly called a Purusha.[579] As regards woman, O lord of
all beings, she follows persons of her sex. By consulting these foremost
of Rivers, they will be honoured by me. The sacred Saraswati is the
foremost river of all rivers. She courses towards the ocean and is truly
the first of all streams. Vipasa also here, and Vitasta, and
Chandrabhaga, and Iravati, and Satadru, and the river Devika, and
Kausiki, and Gomati.[580] and this celestial River who has in her all the
sacred Tirthas, viz., the goddess Ganga, who having her rise in Heaven
hath descended on the Earth and is regarded as the foremost of all
streams; Having said this, the spouse of that god of gods, that foremost
of all righteous persons, smilingly addressed all those Rivers of her
sex. Indeed, the spouse of the great god, devoted to the performance of
all duties, questioned those individuals of her sex about the duties of
women. Verily, those foremost of rivers having Ganga for their first are
all conversant with the duties of women.'

"Uma said, 'The illustrious god has asked a question relating to the
duties of women. I desire to answer Sankara after having consulted with
you. I do not see any branch of knowledge on Earth or Heaven that is
capable of being mastered by any unaided individual. Ye rivers that run
towards the ocean, it is for this that I seek your opinions! It was in
this way that those foremost of Rivers, all of whom were auspicious and
highly sacred, were questioned by Siva's spouse. Then the celestial River
Ganga, who worshipped the daughter of the prince of mountains in return,
was selected for answering the question. Verily, she of sweet smiles is
held as swelling with diverse kinds of understanding and well-conversant
with the duties of women. The sacred goddess, capable of dispelling all
fear of sin, possessed of humility in consequence of her intelligence,
well acquainted with all duties, and enriched with an intelligence
exceedingly comprehensive, sweetly smiling, uttered these, words, 'O
goddess, thou art always devoted to the due performance of all duties.
Thou hast favoured me highly by thus questioning me! O sinless one, thou
art honoured by the entire universe, yet thou askest me that am but a
river. That person who, though himself competent (to discourse on a
topic) yet asks another, or who pays a graceful tribute to another,
certainly deserves, I think, to be regarded as righteous-souled. Verily,
such a person deserves to be called learned and wise. That person never
falls into disgrace who asks such speakers as are endued with knowledge
and science and as are well-conversant with premises and inferences. A
proud man, even when enriched with intelligence, by speaking in the midst
of an assembly otherwise (that is, by relying upon his own powers alone
and without reference to or consultation with others), finds himself
uttering only words of weak import. Thou art possessed of spiritual
insight, Thou art the foremost of all denizens in Heaven. Thou hast taken
thy rise accompanied by diverse kinds of excellent merit. Thou, O
goddess, art fully competent to discourse on the duties of women! In this
way, the goddess Uma was worshipped by Ganga and honoured with the
ascription of many high merits. The beautiful, goddess, thus praised,
then began to discourse upon all the duties of women in full.'

"Uma said, 'I shall, according to the ordinance, discourse on the subject
of women's duties as far as they are known to me. Do ye all listen with
concentrated attention! The duties of women arise as created at the
outset by kinsmen in the rites of wedding. Indeed, a woman becomes, in
the presence of the nuptial fire, the associate of her lord in the
performance of all righteous deeds.[581] Possessed of a good disposition,
endued with sweet speech, sweet conduct, and sweet features, and always
looking at the face of her husband and deriving as much joy from it as
she does from looking at the face of her child, that chaste woman who
regulates her acts by observing the prescribed restraints, comes to be
regarded as truly righteous in her conduct. Listening (with reverence) to
the duties of wedded life (as expounded in the scriptures), and
accomplishing all those auspicious, duties, that woman who regards
righteousness as the foremost of all objects of pursuit, who observes the
same vows as those that are observed by her husband, who adorned with
chastity, looks upon her spouse as a god, who waits upon and serves him
as if he is a god, who surrenders her own will completely to that of her
lord, who is cheerful, who observes excellent vows, who is endued with
good features, and whose heart is completely devoted to her husband so
much that she never thinks even of any other man, is regarded as truly
righteous in conduct. That wife who, even when addressed harshly and
looked upon with angry eyes by her lord, presents a cheerful aspect to
him, is said to be truly devoted to her husband. She who does not cast
her eyes upon the Moon or the Sun or a tree that has a masculine name,
who is adored by her husband and who is possessed of beautiful features,
is regarded as truly righteous. That woman who treats her husband with
the affection which she shows towards her child, even when he (the
husband) happens to be poor or diseased or weak or worn out with the toil
of travelling, is regarded as truly righteous in her conduct. That woman
who is endued with self-control, who has given birth to children, who
serves her husband with devotion, and whose whole heart is devoted to
him, is regarded as truly righteous in her conduct. That woman who waits
upon and serves her lord with a cheerful heart, who is always cheerful of
heart, and who is possessed of humility, is regarded as truly righteous
in her conduct. That woman who always supports her kinsmen and relatives
by giving them food, and whose relish in gratifying her desires or for
articles of enjoyment, or for the affluence of which she is possessed, or
for the happiness with which she is surrounded, falls short of her relish
for her husband, is regarded as truly righteous in her conduct. That
woman who always takes a pleasure in rising at early down, who is devoted
to the discharge of all household duties, who always keeps her house
clean, who rubs her house daily with cowdung, who always attends to the
domestic fire (for pouring libations upon it), who never neglects to make
offerings of flowers and other articles to the deities, who with her
husband gratifies the deities and guests and all servants and dependants
of the family with that share of food which is theirs by the ordinances,
and who always takes, according to the ordinance, for herself, what food
remains in the house after the needs have been met of gods and guests and
servants, and who gratifies all people who come in contact with her
family and feed them to their fill, succeeds in acquiring great merit.
That woman who is endued with accomplishments, who gratifies the feet of
her father-in-law and mother-in-law, and who is always devoted to her
father and mother, is regarded as possessed of ascetic wealth. That woman
who supports with food Brahmanas that are weak and helpless, that are
distressed or blind or destitute, comes to be regarded as entitled to
share the merit of her husband. That woman who always observes, with a
light heart vows that are difficult of observance, whose heart is devoted
to her lord, and who always seeks good of her lord, is regarded as
entitled to share the merits of her husband. Devotion to her lord is
woman's merit; it is her penance; it is her eternal Heaven. Merit,
penances, and Heaven become hers who looks upon her husband as her all in
all, and who, endued with chastity, seeks to devote herself to her lord
in all things. The husband is the god which women have. The husband is
their friend, The husband is their high refuge. Women have no refuge that
can compare with their husbands, and no god that can compare with him.
The husband's grace and Heaven, are equal in the estimation of a woman;
or, if unequal, the inequality is very trivial. O Maheswara, I do not
desire Heaven itself if thou are not satisfied with me. If the husband
that is poor, or diseased or distressed or fallen among foes, or
afflicted by a Brahmana's curse, were to command the wife to accomplish
anything that is improper or unrighteous or that may lead to destruction
of life itself, the wife should, without any hesitation, accomplish it,
guided by the code whose propriety is sanctioned by the law of Distress.
I have thus, O god, expounded, at thy command, what the duties of women
are, Verily, that woman who conducts herself in this way becomes entitled
to a share of the merits won by her husband,'

"Narada continued, 'Thus addressed, the great god applauded the daughter
of the prince of mountains and then dismissed all persons that had
assembled there, together with all his own attendants. The diverse tribes
of ghostly beings, as also all the embodied Rivers, and the Gandharvas
and Apsaras, all bowed their heads unto Mahadeva and departed for
returning to the places whence they had come."



SECTION CXLVII

"The Rishis said, 'O wielder of Pinaka, O tearer of the eyes of Bhaga, O
thou that art worshipped by all the universe, we desire to hear the glory
of Vasudeva.'

"Maheswara said, 'Hari is superior to the Grandsire himself. He is the
Eternal Purusha. Otherwise called Krishna, he is endued with the
splendour of gold, and shines with effulgence like a second sun.
Possessed of ten arms, he is endued with great energy, and is the slayer
of the foes of the gods. Having a whorl on his breast, he has curly locks
of hair on his head. He is worshipped by all the deities. Brahman has
risen from his abdomen. I have sprung from his head, All the luminaries
in the firmament have sprung from his hair. From the bristles on his body
have sprung all the gods and Asuras. From his body have sprung the Rishis
as also all the eternal worlds. He is the veritable abode of the
Grandsire and the abode of all the gods besides. He is the Creator of
this whole Earth, and He is the Lord of the three worlds He is also the
Destroyer of all creatures mobile and immobile. He is verily the foremost
of all the deities. He is their master. He is the chastiser of all foes.
He is possessed of omniscience. He exists in everything. He is capable of
going everywhere. He is of universal extent (pervading as he does
everything). He is the Supreme Soul. He is the urger of all the senses.
He covers the universe. He is the Supreme Lord. There is nothing in the
three worlds that is superior to him. He is Eternal. He is the slayer of
Madhu, and is otherwise called Govinda. The giver of honours, He will
cause all the kings of Earth to be slain in battle, for achieving the
purposes of the deities, taking birth in a human form. The deities,
abandoned by Him, are unable to accomplish their purposes on earth.
Without obtaining him as their leader they cannot do anything. He is the
leader of all creatures and is adored by all the gods[582]. Within the
abdomen of this Master of the gods who is ever devoted to the
accomplishment of their purposes, of this one who is identical with
Brahma and who is always the refuge of the regenerate Rishis, resides
Brahma (the Grandsire). Indeed, the latter dwells happily in Hari's body
which is the abode. I myself, that am called Sarva, also reside happily
in that happy abode of mine. All the deities too reside in happiness in
His body. Endued with great effulgence, he has eyes that resemble the
petals of the lotus. Sri dwells within Him and He dwells always
associated with her. The bow called Saranga and the discus (called
Sudarsana) are his weapons, together with a sword. He has the enemy of
the snakes (viz., Garuda) sitting on his standard. He is distinguished by
excellent conduct, by purity (of both body and mind), by self-restraint,
by prowess, by energy, by the handsomest form, by tallness and
well-proportioned limbs, by patience, by sincerity, by affluence, by
compassion, by excellence of form, and by might. He shines, endued with
all celestial weapons of wonderful form and make. He has Yoga for his
illusion. He is possessed of a thousand eyes. He is free from every stain
or fault. He is high-minded. He is endued with heroism. He is an object
of pride with all his friends. He is dear to all his kinsmen and
relatives and they are dear to him. He is endued with forgiveness. He is
free from pride or egotism. He is devoted to the Brahmanas and is their
leader. He dispels the fears of all persons afflicted with fear. He
enhances the joys of all his friends. He is the refuge of all creatures.
He is ever engaged in protecting and cherishing the distressed. Possessed
of a thorough acquaintance with all the scriptures, and every kind of
affluence, He is worshipped by all beings. Con-versant with all duties,
He is a great benefactor of even enemies when they seek His protection.
Conversant with policy and endued with policy, He is an utterer of Brahma
and has all His senses under perfect control. For doing good to the
deities, Govinda will take birth in the race of the high-souled Manu.
Verily, endued with high intelligence, He will take birth in the
auspicious and righteous race of that Prajapati. Manu will have a son of
the name of Anga. After Anga will come Antardhaman. From Antardhaman will
spring Havirdhaman, that lord of all creatures, free from every stain.
Havirdhaman will have an illustrious son of the name of Rachinavarhi. He
will have ten sons having Prachetas for their first. Prachetas will have
a son named Daksha who will be regarded as a Prajapati. Daksha will beget
a daughter who will be named Dakshayani. From Dakshayani will spring
Aditya, and from Aditya will spring Manu. From Manu will spring a
daughter named Ila and a son to be named Sudyumna. Ila will have Vudha
for her husband, and from Vudha will spring Pururavas. From Pururavas
will spring Ayu. From Ayu will spring Nahusha, and Nahusha will beget a
son named Yayati. From Yayati will spring a mighty son of the name of
Yadu, Yadu will beget Kroshtri. Kroshtri will beget a mighty son to be
named Vrijinivat. From Vrijinivat will spring Ushadgu the unvanquished.
Ushadgu will beget a son of the name of Chitraratha. Chitraratha will
have a younger son of the name of Sura. Indeed, in the race of these
mighty men, of energy celebrated over all the world, possessed of
excellent conduct and diverse accomplishments, devoted to the performance
of sacrifices and pure in behaviour,--in the pure race honoured by the
Brahmanas, Sura will take his birth. He will be a foremost Kshatriya,
endued with great energy, and possessed of great fame. Sura, that giver
of honours, will beget a son, the spreader of his race, of the name of
Vasudeva, otherwise called Anakadundhuvi. Vasudeva will have a son of the
name of Vasudeva. He will have four hands. He will be exceedingly
liberal, and will honour the Brahmanas greatly. Identical with Brahma, he
will like and love the Brahmanas, and the Brahmanas will like and love
him, that scion of Yadu's race will liberate many kings immured in the
prison of the ruler of the Magadhas, after vanquishing that ruler named
Jarasandha in his capital buried among mountains. Endued with great
energy, he will be rich with the jewels and gems of all the rulers of the
earth. Indeed, in energy he will be unrivalled on earth, possessed of
great prowess, he will be the king of all kings of the earth. Foremost
among all the Surasenas, the puissant one, residing at Dwaraka, will rule
and protect the whole earth after vanquishing all her lords, conversant
as he will be with the science of polity. Assembling together, do ye all
adore Him, as ye adore the Eternal Brahman, with speech, floral wreaths,
and excellent incense and perfumes. He who wishes to see me or the
Grandsire Brahma should first see the illustrious Vasudeva of great
puissance, If He is seen I am seen, as also the Grandsire Brahman, that
foremost of all the gods. In this I do not deem there is any difference.
Know this, ye Rishis of ascetic wealth! That person with whom the
lotus-eyed Vasudeva becomes gratified, all the deities with Brahma
amongst them will also become gratified with. That man who will seek the
protection of Kesava will succeed in earning great achievements and
victory and Heaven. He will be an instructor in religion and duties, and
will earn, great religious merit. All persons conversant with religion
and duties should, with great alacrity, bow down unto that Lord of all
the gods. By adoring that puissant one, one will acquire great merit.
Endued with great energy, that god, with the desire of benefiting all
creatures, created millions of Rishis for the sake of righteousness.
Those millions of Rishis, thus created by that great Ordainer are no
residing on the mountains of Gandhamadana, headed by Sanatkumara and
engaged in the observance of penances. Hence, ye foremost of regenerate
ones, that foremost of all eloquent persons, the righteous Vasudeva
should be adored by all. The illustrious Hari, the puissant Narayana, is
verily, the foremost of all beings in Heaven. Adored, he adores, and
honoured he honours; unto them that make offerings to him, he makes
offerings in return. Worshipped, he worships in return, if seen always,
he sees the seers always. If one seeks His refuge and protection, He
seeks the seeker as his refuge in return. Ye foremost of all righteous
ones, if adored and worshipped, He adores and worships in return. Even
this is the high practice of the faultless Vishnu. Even this is the vow
that is practised by all righteous people, of that first of all deities,
that puissant Lord of all creatures. He is always worshipped in the
world. Verily, that Eternal Being is worshipped by even the deities.
Those persons that are devoted to Him with the steadiness of a vow become
liberated from calamity and fear in proportion to his devotion. The
regenerate ones should always worship Him in thought, word, and deed. The
son of Devaki should be seen by them with reverence and in order to see
Him with reverence they should address themselves to the performance of
penances. Ye foremost of ascetics, even this is the path that I show unto
you. By beholding Him, ye will have behold all the foremost of deities, I
too bow my head in reverence unto that Lord of the universe, that
Grandsire of all the worlds, that mighty and vast boar. By beholding Him
one beholds the Trinity. Ourselves, i.e., all the deities, reside in Him.
He will have an elder brother who will become known over all the world as
Vala. Having a plough for his weapon, in form he will look like a white
hill. In fact, he will be endued with might capable of uplifting the
whole earth. Upon the car of that divine person a tall palmyra,
three-headed and made of gold, will form his proud standard. The head of
that mighty-armed hero, that Lord of all the worlds, will be shaded by
many high-souled snakes of vast bodies. All weapons of attack and defence
will also come to him as soon as he will think of them. He is called
Ananta (Infinite) Verily, that illustrious one is identical with the
immutable Hari. Once on a time the mighty Garuda, the son of Kasyapa, was
addressed by the deities in these words, 'Do thou, O puissant one, see if
this one has any end!' Though possessed of great energy and might,
Garuda, however, failed to find out the end of this illustrious one who
is identical with the Supreme Soul. Supporting the whole earth on his
head, he resides in the nether regions. He roves through the universe as
Sesha, filled with great joy. He is Vishnu, He is the illustrious Ananta.
He is the supporter of the earth. He that is Rama is Hrishikesa. He that
is Achyuta is Ananta, the bearer of the earth. Both of those foremost of
all creatures are celestial and endued with celestial prowess. One of
them is armed with the discus and the other with the plough. They deserve
every honour and should be seen, I have, through my kindness for you,
have thus declared to you the nature of Vasudeva. Even this, ye ascetics
possessed of wealth of penances, is Righteousness, I have declared all
this to you so that ye may, with reverence and care, worship Krishna,
that foremost one of Yadu's race."



SECTION CXLVIII

"Narada said, 'At the conclusion of Mahadeva's speech, loud roars were
heard in the firmament. Thunders bellowed, with flashes of lightening.
The welkin was enveloped with blue and thick clouds. The deity of the
clouds then poured pure water like to what he does in the season of
rains. A thick darkness set in. The points of the compass could no longer
be distinguished. Then on that delightful, sacred, and eternal breast of
that celestial mountain, the assembled Rishis no longer saw the multitude
of ghostly beings that associate with Mahadeva. Soon, however, the welkin
cleared. Some of the Rishis set out for the sacred waters. Others
returned whence they came. Verily, beholding that wonderful and
inconceivable sight, they became filled with amazement. The discourse too
between Sankara and Uma had been heard by them with the feelings. That
foremost of all Beings, of whom the high-souled Sankara spoke to us on
that mountain, art Thou. Verily, thou art identical with Eternal Brahma.
Some time also Mahadeva burnt Himavat with his energy. Thou too hast
shown us a similar sight of wonder. Indeed, we have been put in
remembrance of that fact by what we have witnessed today. O mighty-armed
Janardana, I have thus, O puissant one, recited to thee the glory of that
god of gods, viz., him that is called Kapardin or Girisa!'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed by those denizens of ascetic
retreats, Krishna, the delighter of Devaki paid due honours unto all
those Rishis. Filled with delight, those Rishis once more addressed
Krishna, saying, 'O slayer of Madhu, do Thou repeatedly show Thyself to
us at all times! O puissant one, Heaven itself cannot rejoice us so much
as a right of Thyself Everything that was said by the illustrious Bhava
(regarding Thyself) is true. O crusher of foes, we have told Thee all
about that mystery. Thou art Thyself conversant with the truth of every
topic. Since, however, asked by us, it pleased Thee to ask us in return,
we have, for that reason, recited everything (about the discourse of
Bhava with Uma) to Thee for only pleasing Thee. There is nothing in the
three worlds that is unknown to Thee. Thou art fully conversant with the
birth and origin of all things, indeed, with everything that operates as
a cause (for the production of other objects). In consequence of the
lightness of our character, we are unable to bear (within ourselves the
knowledge of) any mystery (without disclosing it).[583] Indeed, in Thy
presence, O puissant one, we indulge in incoherences from the lightness
of our hearts. There is no wonderful thing that is unknown to Thee!
Whatever is on earth, and whatever is in heaven, all is known to Thee! We
take our leave of Thee, O Krishna, for returning to our respective abodes
Mayst Thou increase in intelligence and prosperity! O sire, Thou wilt
soon get a son like unto Thee or even more distinguished than Thyself. He
will be endued with great energy and splendour. He will achieve great
feats, and become possessed of puissance as great as Thine!'[584]

"Bhishma continued, 'After this, the great Rishis bowed unto that god of
gods, that scion of Yadu's race, that foremost of all Beings. They then
circumambulated Him and taking His leave, departed. As regards Narayana,
who is endued with prosperity and blazing effulgence, He returned to
Dwaraka after having duly observed that vow of His. His spouse Rukmini
conceived, and on the expiration of the tenth month a son was born of
her, possessed of heroism and honoured by all for his highly wonderful
accomplishments. He is identical with that Kama (Desire) which exists in
every creature and which pervades every existent condition. Indeed, he
moves within the hearts of both gods and Asuras. This Krishna is that
foremost of all persons. Even he, endued with the hue of the clouds is
that four-handed Vasudeva. Through affection He has attached himself to
the Pandavas, and you also, ye sons of Pandu, have attached yourselves to
Him. Achievements, Prosperity, Intelligence, and the path that leads to
heaven, are all there where this one, viz., the illustrious Vishnu of
three steps, is. He is the three and thirty gods with Indra at their
head. There is no doubt in this. He is the one Ancient God. He is the
foremost of all gods. He is the refuge of all creatures. He. is without
beginning and without destruction. He is unmanifest. He is the
high-souled slayer of Madhu. Endued with mighty energy, He has taken
birth (among men) for accomplishing the purpose of the gods. Verily, this
Madhava is the expounder of the most difficult truths relating to Profit
or Wealth, and he is also their achiever. O son of Pritha, the victory
thou hast obtained over thy enemies, thy unrivalled achievements, the
dominion thou hast acquired over the whole earth, are all due to thy side
having been taken up by Narayana. The fact of thy having got the
inconceivable Narayana for thy protector and refuge, enabled thee to
become an Adharyu (chief sacrificer) for pouring multitudes of kings as
libations on the blazing fire of battle. This Krishna was thy great
sacrificial ladle resembling the all-destroying fire that appears at the
end of the Yuga. Duryodhana, with his sons, brothers and kinsmen, was
much to be pitied inasmuch as, moved by wrath, he made war with Hari and
the wielder of Gandiva. Many sons of Diti, many foremost of Danavas, of
huge bodies and vast strength, have perished in the fire of Krishna's
discus like insects in a forest conflagration. How incapable then must
human beings be of battling against that Krishna,--human beings who, O
tiger among men, are destitute of strength and might! As regards Jaya, he
is a mighty Yogin resembling the all-destroying Yuga-fire in energy.
Capable of drawing the bow equally with both hands, he is always in the
van of fight. With his energy, O king, he has slain all the troops of
Suyodhana. Listen to me as I tell thee what Mahadeva having the bovine
bull for the device on his standard had recited unto the ascetics on the
breast of the Himavat. His utterances constitute a Purana. The
advancement of greatness, energy, strength, prowess, puissance, humility,
and lineage that are in Arjuna can come up to only a third part of the
measure in which those attributes reside in Krishna. Who is there that
can transcend Krishna in these attributes? Whether that is possible or
not, listen (and judge). There where the illustrious Krishna is, there is
unrivalled Excellence.[585] As regards ourselves, we are persons of
little understanding. Dependent upon the will of others, we are
exceedingly unfortunate. Knowingly we betook ourselves to the eternal
path of death. Thou, however, art devoted to sincerity of conduct. Having
formerly pledged thyself against taking thy kingdom, thou didst not take
it, desirous of maintaining thy pledge.[586] O king, thou makest too much
of the slaughter of thy kinsmen and friends in battle (brought about, as
thou believest, by thyself). Thou shouldst remember, however, O chastiser
of foes, that it is not right to violate a pledge.[587] All those who
have fallen on the field of battle have really been slain by Time.
Verily, all of us have been slain by Time. Time is, indeed, all-powerful.
Thou art fully conversant with the puissance of Time. Afflicted by Time,
it does not behove thee to grieve. Know that Krishna Himself, otherwise
called Hari, is that Time with blood-red eyes and with club in hand. For
these reasons, O son of Kunti, it does not behove thee to grieve for thy
(slain) kinsfolk. Be thou always free, O delighter of the Kurus, from
grief. Thou hast heard of the glory and greatness of Madhava as recited
by me. That is sufficient for enabling a good man to understand Him.
Having heard the words of Vyasa as also of Narada endued with great
intelligence, I have discoursed to thee on the adorableness of Krishna. I
have myself added; from my own knowledge, something to that discourse.
Verily, I have discoursed also on the surpassing puissance of Krishna as
recited by Mahadeva, unto that conclave of Rishis (on the breast of the
Himavat). The discourse too between Maheswara and the daughter of
Himavat, O Bharata, has been recited by me to thee. He who will bear in
mind that discourse when emanating from a foremost person, he who will
listen to it, and he who will recite it (for other people's hearing), is
sure to win what is highly beneficial. That man will find all his wishes
fulfilled. Departing from this world he will ascend to Heaven. There is
no doubt in this. That man who, desirous of obtaining what is beneficial
for himself, should devote himself to Janardana. O king of the Kurus, it
behoves thee also to always bear in mind those incidents of duty and
righteousness which were declared by Maheswara. if thou conduct thyself
according to those precepts, if thou bear the rod of chastisement
rightly, if thou protect thy subjects properly, thou mayst be sure of
attaining to heaven. It behoves thee, O king, to protect thy subjects
always according to the dictates of righteousness. The stout rod of
chastisement which the king bears has been said to be the embodiment of
his righteousness or merit.[588] Hearing this discourse, fraught with
righteousness, between Sankara and Uma, that I have recited in the
presence of this righteous conclave, one should worship with reverence
that god having the bovine bull for the device on his banner. One that
becomes even desirous of listening to that discourse should worship
Mahadeva with reverence. Verily, the person that wishes to obtain what is
beneficial for him, should adore Mahadeva with a pure heart. Even this is
the command of the faultless and high-souled Narada. Even he has
commanded such worship of the great god, O son of Pandu, do thou obey
that command of Narada. O puissant king, even these are the wonderful
incidents that occurred on the sacred breast of the Himavat respecting
Vasudeva and Sthanu, O son of Kunti. Those occurrences flowed from the
very nature of those high-souled deities. Vasudeva, accompanied by the
wielder of Gandiva, practised eternal penances in the retreat of Vadari
for ten thousand years.[589] Verily, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, both of
eyes like lotus-petals, underwent severe austerities for the duration of
three whole Yugas. I have learnt this from Narada and Vyasa, O king. The
lotus-eyed and mighty-armed Vasudeva, while yet a child (in human form)
achieved the great feat of slaying Kansa for the relief of his kinsmen. I
do not venture, O son of Kunti, to enumerate the feats of this Ancient
and Eternal Being, O Yudhishthira. Without doubt, O son, high and great
benefits will be reaped by thee who ownest that foremost of all persons,
viz., Vasudeva, for thy friend. I grieve for the wicked Duryodhana in
respect of even the next world to which he has gone. It was for him that
the whole earth has been depopulated with her seeds and elephants.
Indeed, through the fault of Duryodhana, of Karna, of Sakuni, and of
Duhsasana numbering the fourth, that the Kurus have perished.

"Vaisampayana continued, 'While that foremost of men, viz., the son of
Ganga, addressed him in this strain, the Kuru king (Yudhishthira)
remained entirely silent in the midst of those high-souled persons (who
had assembled together for listening to the discourses of Bhishma). All
the kings with Dhritarashtra amongst them became filled with wonder upon
hearing the words of the Kuru grandsire. In their minds they worshipped
Krishna and then turned towards him with hands joined in reverence. The
Rishis also with Narada at their head, accepted and applauded the words
of Bhishma and approved of them joyfully. These were the wonderful
discourses recited by Bhishma which Pandu's son (Yudhishthira) with all
his brothers heard with joy. Some time after, when king (Yudhishthira)
saw that Ganga's son who had given away abundant wealth as presents unto
the Brahmanas in the sacrifices performed by him, had rested and become
refreshed, the intelligent king once more asked him as follows.'"



SECTION CXLIX

"Vaisampayana said, 'Having heard all the duties in their entirety and
all those sacred acts and objects that cleanse human beings of their
sins. Yudhishthira once more addressed the son of Santanu in the
following words.'

"Yudhishthira said, "Who may be said to be the one god in the world? Who
may be said to be the one object which is our sole refuge? Who is he by
worshipping whom or hymning whose praises human being would get what is
beneficial? What religion is that which, according to thy judgment, is
the foremost of all religions? What are those Mantras by reciting which a
living creature becomes freed from the bonds of birth and life?'

"Bhishma said, 'One should always, with alacrity and throwing away all
languor, hymn the praises of that Lord of the universe, that god of gods
(viz., Vasudeva), who is Infinite and the foremost of all Beings, by
uttering His thousand names. By always worshipping with reverence and
devotion that immutable Being, by meditating on him, by hymning His
praises and bowing the head unto Him, and by performing sacrifices unto
Him, indeed by always praising Vishnu, who is without beginning and
without end or destruction, who is the Supreme Lord of all the worlds,
and who is the Master and Controller of the universe, one can succeed in
transcending all sorrow. Verily, He is devoted to the Brahmanas,
conversant with all duties and practices, the enhancer of the fame and
achievement of all persons, the master of all the worlds, exceedingly
wonderful, and the prime cause of the origin of all creatures. Even this,
in my judgment, is the foremost religion of all religions, viz., one
should always worship and hymn the praises of the lotus-eyed Vasudeva
with devotion. He is the highest Energy. He is the highest Penance. He is
the highest Brahma. He is the highest refuge. He is the most holy of all
holies, the most auspicious of all auspicious objects. He is the god of
all the gods and He is the immutable father of all creatures. On the
advent of the primal Yuga, all creatures spring from Him. On the
expiration, again of a Yuga, all things disappear in Him.[590] Hear, O
king, the thousand names, possessed of great efficacy in destroying sins,
of that foremost one in all the worlds that Master of the universe, viz.,
Vishnu. All those names derived from His attributes, secret and
well-known, of the high-souled Vasudeva which were sung by Rishis, I
shall recite to thee for the good of all. They are, Om! He that enters
all things, besides Himself, He that covers all things, He unto whom
sacrificial libations are poured, the Lord of the Past, the Present, and
the Future, the Creator (or Destroyer) of all existent things, the
upholder of all existent things, the Existent, the Soul of all, the
Originator of all things (I--IX); of cleansed Soul, the Supreme Soul, the
highest Refuge of all emancipated persons, the Immutable, He that lies
enclosed in a case, the Witness, He that knows the material case in which
He resides, the Indestructible (X--XVII);[591] He upon whom the mind
rests during Yoga-abstraction, the Guide or leader of all persons
conversant with Yoga, the Lord of both Pradhana (or Prakriti) and
Purusha. He that assumed a human form with a leonine head, He of handsome
features and equipments, He of beautiful hair, the foremost of Purushas
(XVIII--XXIV);[592] the embodiment of all things, the Destroyer of all
things, He that transcends the three attributes of Sattwa, Rajas and
Tamas, the Motionless, the Beginning of all things, the Receptacle into
which all things sink at the universal Dissolution, the Immutable, He who
takes birth at his own will, He who causes the acts of all living
creatures to fructify (in the form of weal or woe) the Upholder of all
things, the Source from which the primal elements have sprung, the
Puissant One, He in whom is the unbounded Lordship over all things
(XXV--XXXVII);[593] the Self-born, He that gives happiness to His
worshippers, the presiding Genius (of golden form) in the midst of the
Solar disc, the Lotus-eyed, Loud-voiced, He that is without beginning and
without end. He that upholds the universe (in the form of Ananta and
others), He that ordains all acts and their fruits, He that is superior
to the Grandsire Brahma (XXXVIII--XLVI);[594] the Immeasurable, the Lord
of the senses (or He that has curled locks), He from whose navel the
primeval lotus sprang, the Lord of all the deities, the Artificer of the
universe, the Mantra, He that weakens or emaciates all things, He that is
vast, the Ancient one, He that is enduring (XLVII--LVI).[595] He that is
incapable of being seized (by either the senses or the mind), the Eternal
One, Krishna, the Red-eyed, He that kills all creatures at the time of
the universal dissolution, He that is vast for knowledge and puissance
and other attributes of the kind, He that resides in three parts (above,
middle, and below) of every, creature. That which cleanses, is
auspicious, and high (LVII--LXIV).[596] He that urges all creatures in
respect of all their acts. He that causes the life-breaths to act. He
that causes all living creatures to live, the Eldest, the Foremost of all
those that are regarded as the Lords of all creatures, He that has gold
in his abdomen, He that has the Earth for his abdomen, the Lord of Sri or
Lakshmi, the Slayer of Madhu (LXV--LXXII)[597]: the Omnipotent, He that
is endued with great prowess, He that is armed with the bow, He that is
Possessed of a mind capable of bearing the contents of all treatises, He
that roves through the universe, riding on Garuda. He that is well suited
to the offerings made unto Him and that has the power to enjoy them
properly, the Unrivalled, He that is incapable of being discomfited, He
that knows all acts that are done, He that is identical with all acts, He
that rests on His own true self (LXXIV--LXXXIV)[598] the Lord of all the
deities, He that is the Refuge of all, the embodiment of the highest
felicity, He whose seed is the universe, He that is the source of all
things, the day (in consequence of His awakening Jiva who is steeped in
the sleep of Nescience), the Year, the Snake (owing to His being
incapable of being seized), the embodiment of Conviction, He that sees
all things (LXXXV--XCIV):[599] the Unborn, the Lord of all creatures, He
that has achieved success, He that is Success itself, He that is the
beginning of all things (in consequence of His being the cause of all
things), He that is above deterioration, He that is Righteousness in the
form of the bovine bull and the great boar that raised the submerged
Earth, He that is of immeasurable soul, He that stands aloof from all
kinds of union (XCV--CIII);[600] He that is Pauaka among the deities
called Vasus (or, He that dwells in His worshippers). He that is liberal
soul, being freed from wrath and hatred and pride and other evil
passions. Truth whose soul is equable in consequence of His thorough
impartiality, He that has been measured by His worshippers, He that is
always equal, being above all change or modification, He that never
refuses to grant the wishes of His worshippers, He whose eyes are like
the petals of the lotus, He whose acts are always characterised by
Righteousness (or He who is always engaged in granting the wishes of
those that are devoted to Him), He that is of the form of Righteousness
(CIV--CXIII); He that destroys all creatures (or their pains), the Many
headed, He that upholds the universe, He that is the source of the
universe, He who is of pure or spotless fame, the Immortal One He that is
Eternal and Fixed, He that is possessed of beautiful limbs, (or, He the
ascension unto whom is the best of all acts), He who has such knowledge
having penance for its indication that He is able to agitable Prakriti
for evolving the universe out of her (CXIV--CXXII); He that goes
everywhere (in the sense of pervading all things as their cause), the
Omniscient One, He that blazes forth in unmodified effulgence, He whose
troops are everywhere (in the form of devoted associates), (or He at
whose very sight the Danava troops are scattered in all directions). He
that is coveted (or sought) by all (or, He that grinds all His foes), He
that is the Veda, He that is conversant with the Veda, He that is
conversant with all the limbs (or branches) of the Veda, He that
represents the limbs (or branches) of the Veda (i.e., all the subsidiary
sciences), He that settles the interpretations of the Vedas, He that has
no superior in wisdom (CXXIII--CXXXIII); He that is the master of all the
worlds, He that is the master of the deities, He that is the Supervisor
of both Righteousness and Unrighteousness (for giving the fruits thereof
to those that seek the one or the other), He that is both Effect and
Cause, (or, He whose life has not been determined by acts achieved on any
previous occasion in consequence of His transcending Prakriti). He that
is four-souled (in consequence of His four forms of Aniruddha, Pradyumna,
Sankarshana and Vasudeva). He that is known by four forms (as above), He
that has four horns (which appeared on Him when He had assumed a human
form with a lion's head for slaying the Asura chief Hiranya-Kasipu), He
that has four arms (for holding the conch, discus, mace, and lotus)
(CXXXIV--CXLI); He that blazes forth in effulgence, He that is the giver
of food and cherishes those that are good; He that does not bear or put
up with those that are wicked, (or, He that puts up with the occasional
transgressions of his devotees); He that existed before the universe
started into life; He that is stainless; He that is ever victorious; He
that vanquishes the very deities; He that is the material cause of the
universe; He that repeatedly resides in material causes (CXLII--CL); He
that is the younger brother of Indra, (or He that transcends Indra in
accomplishments and attributes). He that took birth as a dwarf (from
Aditi by her husband Kasyapa in order to beguile the Asura king Vali of
the sovereignty of the three worlds, and bestow the same upon Indra who
had been dispossessed of it), He that is tall (in allusion to the vast
universal form of His which He assumed at the sacrifice of Vali for
covering Heaven, Earth, and the Nether regions with three steps of His).
He whose acts are never futile, He that cleanses (those that worship Him,
those that hear of Him and those that think of Him), He that is endued
with pre-eminent energy and strength, He that transcends Indra in all
attributes, He that accepts all His worshippers, He that is the Creation
itself in consequence of His being the Causes thereof, He that upholds
His self in the same form without being ever subject to birth, growth, or
death, He that sustains all creatures in their respective functions in
the 'universe, He that controls the hearts of all creatures (CLI--CLXII);
He that deserves to be known by those who wish to achieve what is for
their highest good; He who is the celestial physician in the form of
Dhanwantari, (or He who cures that foremost of all diseases, viz., the
bonds that bind one to the world); He that is always engaged in Yoga; He
that slays great Asuras for establishing Righteousness; He that is the
Lord of that Lakshmi who sprang from the ocean when it was churned by the
deities and the Asuras, (or, He that cherishes both the goddesses of
prosperity and learning); He that is honey (in consequence of the
pleasure He gives to those that succeed in having a taste of him); He
that transcends the senses (or is invisible to those that turn away from
Him); He that is possessed of great powers of illusion (manifested in His
beguiling Mahadeva and the deities on many occasions); He that puts forth
great energy (in achieving mighty feats); He that transcends all in might
(CLXIII--CLXXII); He that transcends all in intelligence; He that
transcends all in puissance; He that transcends all in ability; He that
discovers the universe by the effulgence emanating from his body; He
whose body is incapable of being ascertained by the eye (or any other
sense organ of knowledge); He that is possessed of every beauty; He whose
soul is incapable of being comprehended by either deities or men; He that
held on his back, in the form of the vast tortoise, the huge mountain,
Mandara, which was made the churning staff by the deities and the Asuras
when they set themselves to churn the great ocean for obtaining therefrom
all the valuables hid in its bosom; (or, He who held up the mountains of
Govardhana in the woods of Brinda for protecting the denizens of that
delightful place, who were especial objects of His kindness, from the
wrath of Indra who poured incessant showers for days together with a view
to drowning every thing) (CLXXIII--CLXXX); He that can shoot His shafts
to a great distance, piercing through obstruction of every kind; He that
raised the submerged Earth, having assumed the form of the mighty Boar;
He on whose bosom dwells the goddess of Prosperity; (or He that is
identical with Kama, the lord of Rati); He that is the Refuge of those
that are righteous; He that is incapable of being won without thorough
devotion; (or, He that is incapable of being immured or restrained by any
one putting forth his powers); He that is the delight of the deities, or,
He that is the embodiment of fullness of joy; He that rescued the
submerged Earth; (or He that understands the hymns addressed to him by
His devotees); He that is the Master of ell eloquent persons (or He that
dispels the calamities of all those who know him) (CLXXXL--CLXXXVIII); He
that is full of blazing effulgence) He that suppressed the afflictions of
His adorers; (or, He that assumes the form of Yama, the universal
Destroyer, for chastising all persons that fall away from their duties);
He that assumed the form of a Swan for communicating the Vedas to the
Grandsire Brahman; (or, He that enters into the bodies of all persons);
He that has Garuda, the prince of the feathery denizens of the welkin,
for His vehicle; He that is the foremost of snakes in consequence of His
identity with Sesha or Ananta who upholds on his head the vast Earth,
(or, He that has the hood of the prince of snakes for His bed while He
lies down to sleep on the vast expansion of water after the dissolution
of the universe); He whose navel is as beautiful as gold; He that
underwent the severest austerities in the form of Narayana at Vadari on
the breast of Himavat; He whose navel resembles a lotus; (or, He from
whose navel sprang the primeval lotus in which the Grandsire Brahma was
born); He that is the Lord of all creatures (CLXXXIX--CXCVII); He that
transcends death; (or, He that wards off Death from those that are
devoted to him); He that always casts a kind eye on His worshippers; (or,
He that sees all things in the universe); He that destroys all things;
(or, He that drenches with nectar all those that worship Him with
single-minded devotion); He that is the Ordainer of all ordainers; (or,
He that unites all persons with the consequences of their acts); He that
himself enjoys and endures the fruits of all acts, (or, He that assumed
the form of Rama, the son of Dasaratha, and going into exile at the
command of His sire made a treaty with Sugriva the chief of the Apes for
aiding him in the recovery of his kingdom from the grasp of his elder
brother Vali in return for the assistance which Sugriva promised Him for
recovering from Ravana His wife Sita who had been ravished by that
Rakshasa and borne away to his island home in Lanka), He that is always
of the same form; (or, He that is exceedingly affectionate unto His
worshippers); He that is always moving; (or, He that is of the form of
Kama who springs up in the heart of every creature); He that is incapable
of being endured by Danavas and Asuras (or, He that rescued His wife Sita
after slaying Ravana, or, He that shows compassion towards even Chandalas
and members of other low castes when they approach Him with devotion, in
allusion to His friendship, in the form of Rama, for Guhaka the chief of
the Chandalas, inhabiting the country known by the name of
Sringaverapura); He that chastises the wicked; (or, He that regulates the
conduct of all persons by the dictates of the Srutis and the Smritis); He
whose soul has true knowledge for its indication; (or, He that destroyed
Ravana, the foe of the gods, having assumed the form of Rama that was
full of compassion and other amiable virtues); He that destroys the foes
of the deities (or, He that slays those who obstruct or forbid the giving
of presents unto deserving persons) (CXCVII--CCVIII); He that is the
instructor in all sciences and the father of all; He that is the
instructor of even the Grandsire Brahma; He that is the abode or resting
place of all creatures; He that is the benefactor of those that are good
and is free from the stain of falsehood; He whose prowess is incapable of
being baffled; He that never casts his eye on such acts as are not
sanctioned or approved by the scriptures; He that casts his eye on such
acts as are sanctioned or approved by the scriptures; (or, He whose eye
never winks or sleeps); He that wears the unfading garland of victory
called by the name of Vaijayanti; He that is the Lord of speech and that
is possessed of great liberality insomuch that He rescued the lowest of
the low and the vilest of the vile by granting them His grace
(CCLX--CCXVIII); He that leads persons desirous of Emancipation to the
foremost of all conditions, viz., Emancipation itself; (or, He that
assumes the form of a mighty Fish and scudding through the vast expanse
of waters that cover the Earth when the universal dissolution comes, and
dragging the boat tied to His horns, leads Manu and others to safety); He
that is the leader of all creatures; (or, He that sports in the vast
expanse of waters which overwhelm all things at the universal
dissolution); He whose words are the Veda and who rescued the Vedas when
they were submerged in the waters at the universal dissolution; He that
is the accomplisher of all functions in the universe; He that assumes the
form of the wind for making all living creatures act or exert themselves;
(or, He whose motions are always beautiful, or, who wishes His creatures
to glorify Him); He that is endued with a thousand heads; He that is the
Soul of the universe and as such pervades all things; He that has a
thousand eyes and a thousand legs; (CCXIX--CCXXVI); He that causes the
wheel of the universe to revolve at His will; He whose soul is freed from
desire and who transcends those conditions that invest Jiva and to which
Jiva is liable; He that is concealed from the view of all persons that
are attached to the world; (or, He that has covered the eyes of all
persons with the bandage of nescience); He that grinds those that turn
away from him; He that sets the days a-going in consequence of His being
identical with the Sun; He that is the destroyer of all-destroying Time
itself; He that conveys the libations poured on the sacred fire unto
those for whom they are intended; (or, He that bears the universe,
placing it on only a minute fraction of His body); He that has no
beginning; (or, He that has no fixed habitation) He that upholds the
Earth in space (in the form of Sesha, or, rescues her in the form of the
mighty boar or supports her as a subtil pervader) (CCXXVII--CCXXXV); He
that is exceedingly inclined to grace, insomuch that He grants happiness
to even foes like Sisupala; He that has been freed from the attributes of
Rajas (passion) and Tamas (darkness) so that He is pure or stainless
Sattwa by itself; (or, He that has obtained the fruition of all His
wishes); He that supports the universe; He that feeds (or enjoys the
universe); He that is displayed in infinite puissance; He that honours
the deities, the Pitris, and His own worshippers; He that is honoured or
adored by those that are themselves honoured or adored by others; (or, He
whose acts are all beautiful and enduring); He that accomplishes the
purposes of others; (or, He that is the benefactor of others); He that
withdraws all things unto Himself at the universal dissolution; (or, He
that destroys the foes of the deities or of His worshippers); He that has
the waters for his home; (or, He that is the sole Refuge of all creatures
or He that destroys the ignorance of all creatures (CCXXXVI--CCXLVI); He
that is distinguished above all, He that cherishes the righteous, He that
cleanses all the worlds, He that crowns with fruition the desires of all
creatures, He whose wishes are always crowned with fruition, He that
gives success to all, He that bestows success upon those that solicit Him
for it (CCXLVII--CCLVI); He that presides over all sacred days; (or, He
that overwhelms Indra himself with His own excellent attributes), He that
showers all objects of desire upon His worshippers, He that walks over
all the universe, He that offers the excellent flight of steps
constituted by Righteousness (unto those that desire to ascend to the
highest place); He that has Righteousness in His abdomen; (or, He that
protects Indra even as a mother protects the child in her womb); He that
aggrandises (His worshippers), He that spreads Himself out for becoming
the vast universe, He that is aloof from all things (though pervading
them); He that is the receptacle of the ocean of Srutis (CCLVII--CCLXIV);
He that is possessed of excellent arms (i.e., arms capable of upholding
the universe); He that is incapable of being borne by any creature, He
from whom flowed the sounds called Brahman (or Veda), He that is the Lord
of all Lords of the universe, He that is the giver of wealth, He that
dwells in His own puissance, He that is multiform, He that is of vast
form, He that resides in the form of Sacrifice in all animals, He that
causes all things to be displayed (CCLXV--CCLXXIV), He that is endued
with great might, energy, and splendour; He that displays Himself in
visible forms to His worshippers, He that scorches the unrighteous with
His burning energy, He that is enriched with the sixfold attributes (of
affluence, etc.), He that imparted the Veda to the Grandsire Brahma, He
that is of the form of the Samans, Riks, and Yajuses (of the Veda); He
that soothes His worshippers burning with the afflictions of the world
like the rays of the moon cooling all living creatures of the world, He
that is endued with blazing effulgence like the sun (CCLXXV--CCLXXXII);
He from whose mind has sprung the moon, He that blazes forth in His own
effulgence, He that nourishes all creatures even like the luminary marked
by the hare, He that is the Master of the deities, He that is the great
medicine for the disease of worldly attachment, He that is the great
causeway of the universe, He that is endued with knowledge and other
attributes that are never futile and with prowess that is incapable of
being baffled (CCLXXXIII--CCLXXXIX); He that is solicited by all
creatures at all times, viz., the Past, the Present, and the Future; He
that rescues his worshippers by casting kind glances upon them, He that
sanctifies even them that are sacred; He that merges the life-breath in
the Soul; (or, He that assumes diverse forms for protecting both the
Emancipated and the Unemancipated); He that kills the desires of those
that are Emancipated; (or, He that prevents evil desires from arising in
the minds of His worshippers); He that is the sire of Kama (the principle
of desire or lust); He that is most agreeable, He that is desired by all
creatures, He that grants the fruition of all desires, He that has the
ability to accomplishing all acts (CCXC--CCXCIX); He that sets the four
Yugas to begin their course; He that causes the Yugas to continually
revolve as on a wheel, He that is endued with the diverse kinds of
illusion (and, therefore, the cause from which spring the different kinds
of acts that distinguish the different Yugas); He that is the greatest of
eaters (in consequence of His swallowing all things at the end of every
Kalpa); He that is incapable of being seized (by those that are not His
worshippers); He that is manifest (being exceedingly vast); He that
subjugates thousands of foes (of the deities); He that subjugates
innumerable foes (CCC--CCCVIII); He that is desired (by even the
Grandsire and Rudra, or He that is adored in sacrifices); He that is
distinguished above all; He that is desired by those that are endued with
wisdom and righteousness; He that has an ornament of (peacock's) feathers
on His headgear; He that stupefies all creatures with His illusion; He
that showers His grace on all His worshippers; He that kills the wrath of
the righteous; He that fills the unrighteous with wrath; He that is the
accomplisher of all acts; He who holds the universe on his arms; He that
upholds the Earth (CCCIX--CCCXVIII); He that transcends the six
well-known modifications (of inception, birth or appearance growth,
maturity, decline, and dissolution); He that is endued with great
celebrity (in consequence of His feats); He that causes all living
creatures to live (in consequence of His being the all-pervading soul);
He that gives life; the younger brother of Vasava (in the form of Upendra
or the dwarf); He that is the receptacle of all the waters in the
universe; He that covers all creatures (in consequence of His being the
material cause of everything); He that is never heedless (being always
above error); He that is established on His own glory (CCCXIX--CCCXXVII);
He that flows in the form of nectar; (or, He that dries up all things);
He upholds the path of righteousness; He that bears the burden of the
universe; He that gives desirable boons unto those that solicit them: He
that causes the winds to blow; He that is the son of Vasudeva; (or, He
that covers the universe with His illusions and sports in the midst of
it); He that is endued with extraordinary lustre; He that is the
originating cause of the deities; He that pierces all hostile towns
(CCCXXVIII--CCCXXXVI); He that transcends all sorrow and grief; He that
leads us safely across the ocean of life or the world; He that dispels
from the hearts of all His worshippers the fear of rebirth; He that is
possessed of infinite courage and prowess; He that is an offspring of
Sura's race; He that is the master of all living creatures; He that is
inclined to show His grace unto all; He that has come on earth for a
hundred times (for rescuing the good, destroying the wicked, and
establishing righteousness); He that holds a lotus in one of his hands;
He whose eyes resemble the petals of the lotus (CCCXXXVII--CCCXLVI); He
from whose navel sprang the primeval lotus; (or, He that is seated upon a
lotus); He that is endued with eyes resembling the petals of the lotus;
He that is adored by even worshippers as one seated within the lotus of
His hearts; He that assumed the form of embodied Jiva (through His own
illusion); He that is endued with puissance of every kind; He that grows
in the form of the five primal elements; the Ancient Soul; He that is
endued with vast eyes; He that has Garuda sitting on the standard of His
car (CCCXLVII--CCCCLV); He that is incomparable; the Sarabha (the
lion-killing animal); He that strikes the wicked with terror; He that
knows everything that has occurred in Time; He that accepts, in the forms
of the deities, the butter poured on the sacrificial fire; He that is
known by all kinds of evidence or proof; He upon whose breast sits
Prosperity always; He that is victorious in every battle
(CCCLVI--CCCLXIV); He that is above destruction; He that assumes a red
form; (or, becomes wrathful unto the enemies of His worshippers); He that
is an object of search with the righteous; He that is at the root of all
things; He that has the mark of the string around his abdomen (for Yasoda
had bound Him with a cord while He was Krishna); He that bears or
forgives all injuries; He that upholds the Earth in the form of her
mountains; He that is the foremost of all objects of worship; He that is
endued with great speed; He that swallows vast quantities of food
(CCCLXV--CCCLXXIV); He that caused the creation to start into life; He
that always agitates both Prakriti and Purusha; He that shines with
resplendence; (or, sports in joy); He that has puissance in his stomach;
He that is the Supreme Master of all; He that is the material out of
which the universe has been made; He that is the cause or Agent who has
made the universe: He that is independent of all things; He that ordains
variety in the universe; He that is incapable of being comprehended; He
that renders Himself invisible by the screen of illusion
(CCCLXXV--CCCLXXXV); He that is Chit divested of all attributes; He on
whom all things rest; He in whom all things reside when the universal
dissolution comes; He that assigns the foremost place to those that
worship Him; He that is durable; He that is endued with the highest
puissance; He that has been glorified in the Vedanta; He that is
contented; He that is always full; He whose glance is auspicious
(CCCLXXXVI--CCCXCV); He that fills all Yogins with delight; He that is
the end of all creatures (for it is in Him that all things merge at the
universal dissolution); He that is the faultless Path; He that in the
form of Jiva, leads to Emancipation; He that leads (Jiva to
Emancipation); He that has none to lead Him; He that is endued with great
might; He that is the foremost of all beings possessed of might; He that
uphold He that is the foremost of all Beings conversant with duty and
religion (CCCXCVI--CDIV); He that joins, at the time of creation, the
disunited elements for forming all objects; He that resides in all
bodies; He that causes all creatures to act in the form of Kshetrajna; He
that creates all creatures after destroying them at the universal
dissolution; He unto whom every one bows with reverence; He that is
extended over the entire universe; He that owns the primeval golden egg
as his abdomen (whence, as from the female uterus), everything proceeds;
He that destroys the foes of the deities; He that overspreads all things
(being the material cause whence they spring); He that spreads sweet
perfumes; He that disregards the pleasures of the senses (CDV--CDXV); He
that is identifiable with the seasons; He at whose sight alone all
worshippers succeed in obtaining the great object of their wish; He that
weakens all creatures; He that dwells in the firmament of the heart,
depending upon His own glory and puissance; He that is capable of being
known everywhere (in consequence of His omnipresence); He that inspires
everyone with dread; He in whom all creatures dwell; He that is clever in
accomplishing all acts; He that constitutes the rest of all creatures
(being, as He is, the embodiment of Emancipation); He that is endued with
competence greater than that of other Beings (CDXVI--CDXXV); He in whom
the whole Universe is spread out? He that is Himself immobile and in whom
all things rest for ever; He that is an object of proof; He that is the
Indestructible and unchanging seed; He that is sought by all (in
consequence of His being happiness); He that has no desire (in
consequence of all His desires having been gratified); He that is the
great cause (which covers the universe): He that has all sorts of things
to enjoy; He that has great wealth wherewith to secure all objects of
desire (CDXXVI--CDXXXIV); He that is above despair; He that exists in the
form of Renunciation; He that is without birth; He that is the stake unto
which Righteousness is tethered; He that is the great embodiment of
sacrifice; He who is the nave of the starry wheel that revolves in the
firmament;[601] He that is the Moon among the constellations; He that is
competent to achieve every feat; He that stays in His own soul when all
things disappear He that cherishes the desire for Creation
(CDXXXV--CDXLIV); He that is the embodiment of all sacrifices; He that is
adored in all sacrifices and religious rites; He that is the most
adorable of the deities present in the sacrifices that men perform; He
that is the embodiment of all such sacrifices in which animals are
offered up according to the ordinance; He that is adored by persons
before they take any food;[602] He that is the Refuge of those that seek
emancipation; He that beholds the acts and omissions of all creatures; He
whose soul transcends all attributes; He that is possessed of
omniscience; He that is identical with knowledge that is unacquired,
unlimited, and capable of accomplishing everything (CDXLV--CDLIV); He
that is observant of excellent vows (chief amongst which is the granting
of favour unto one that solicits it with a pure heart); He that has a
face always full of delight; He that is exceedingly subtle; He that
utters the most agreeable sounds (in the form of the Veda or as Krishna
playing on the lute); He that gives happiness (to all His worshippers);
He that does good to others without expecting any return; He that fills
all creatures with delight; He that has subdued wrath; He that has mighty
arms (so mighty that He has slain as if in sport the mightiest of
Asuras); He that tears those that are unrighteous (CDLV--CDLXIV); He that
causes those persons who are destitute of knowledge of the soul to be
steeped in the deep sleep of His illusion; He that relies on Himself
(being entirely independent of all persons and things); He that
overspreads the entire universe; He that exists in infinite forms; He
that is engaged in vocations infinite in number; He that lives in
everything; He that is full of affection towards all His worshippers; He
that is the universal father (all living creatures of the universe being
as calves sprung from Him); He that holds, in the form of the vast Ocean,
all jewels and gems in His abdomen, He that is the Lord of all treasures
(CDLXV--CDLXXIV); He that is the protector of righteousness; He that
accomplishes all the duties of righteousness; He that is the substratum
of righteousness; He that is existent for all time; He that is
non-existent (in the form of the universe, for the manifested universe is
the result of illusion); He that is destructible (in the form of the
universe); He that is indestructible as Chit; He that is, in the form of
Jiva, destitute of true knowledge; He that is, in the form of the Sun, is
endued with a thousand rays; He that ordains (even all such great and
mighty creatures as Sesha and Garuda, etc.); He that has created all the
Sastras (CDLXXV--CDLXXXV); He that exists, in the form of the Sun, as the
centre of innumerable rays of light; He that dwells in all creatures; He
that is possessed of great prowess; He that is the Master of even Yama
and others of similar puissance; He that is the oldest of the deities
(existing as He does from the beginning); He that exists in His own
glory, casting off all conditions; He that is the Lord of even all the
deities; He that is the ruler of even him that upholds the deities (viz.,
Indra) (CDLXXXVI--CDXCIII); He that transcends birth and destruction; He
that tended and protected kine (in the form of Krishna); He that
nourishes all creatures; He that is approachable by knowledge alone; He
that is Ancient; He that upholds the elements which constitute the body;
He that enjoys and endures (weal and woe, in the form of Jiva); He that
assumed the form of a vast Boar; (or, He that, in the form of Rama, was
the Lord of a large monkey host); He that gave plentiful presents unto
all in a grand sacrifice performed by Him (CDXCIV--DII); He that drinks
Soma in every sacrifice; He that drinks nectar; He that, in the form of
Soma (Chandramas), nourishes all the herbs and plants; He that conquers
foes in a trice when even they are infinite in number; He that is of
universal form and is the foremost of all existent entities; He that is
the chastiser; He that is victorious over all; He whose purposes are
incapable of being baffled; He that deserves gifts; He that gives what
His creatures have not and who protects what they have (DIII--DXII); He
that holds the life-breaths; He that beholds all His creatures as objects
of direct vision; He that never beholds anything beside His own Self; He
that gives emancipation; He whose footsteps (three in number) covered
Heaven, Earth, and the Nether regions; He who is the receptacle of all
the water; He that overwhelms all Space, all Time, and all things; He
that lies on the vast expanse of waters after the universal dissolution;
He that causes the destruction of all things (DXIII--DXXI); He that is
without birth; He that is exceedingly adorable; He that appears in His
own nature; He that has conquered all foes (in the form of wrath and
other evil passions); He that delights those that meditate on Him; He
that is joy; He that fills others with delight; He that swells with all
causes of delight; He that has truth and other virtues for His
indications; He whose foot steps are in the three worlds (DXXII--DXXX);
He that is the first of the Rishis (being conversant with the entire
Vedas); He that is identical with the preceptor Kapila; He that is the
knower of the Universe; He that is Master of the Earth; He that has their
feet; He that is the guardian of the deities; He that has large horns (in
allusion to the piscatory form in which He saved Manu on the occasion of
the universal deluge by scudding through the waters with Manu's boat tied
to His horns); He that exhausts all acts by causing their doers to enjoy
or endure their fruits; (or, He that grinds the Destroyer himself)
(DXXXI--DXXXVIII); the great Boar: He that is understood or apprehended
by the aid of the Vedanta; He that has beautiful troops (in the form of
His worshippers); He that is adorned with golden armlets; He that is
concealed (being knowledge with the aid of the Upanishads only); He that
is deep (in knowledge and puissance); He that is difficult of access; He
that transcends both word and thought, that is armed with the discus and
the mace (DXXXIX--DXLVII); the Ordainer; He that is the cause (in the
form of helper of the universe); He that has never been vanquished; He
that is the Island-born Krishna; He that is enduring (in consequence of
His transcending decay): He that mows all things and is Himself above
deterioration; the Varuna (the deity of the waters); the son of Varuna
(in the form of Vasishtha or Agastya); He that is immovable as a tree; He
that is displayed in His own true form in the lotus of the heart; He that
creates, preserves, and destroys by only a fiat of the mind
(DXLVIII--DLVIII); He that is possessed of the sixfold attributes (of
sovereignty etc.); He that destroys the sixfold attributes (at the
universal dissolution); He that is felicity (in consequence of His
swelling with all kinds of prosperity); He that is adorned with the
triumphal garland (called Vaijayanta); He that is armed with the plough
(in allusion to His incarnation as Valadeva); He that took birth from the
womb of Aditi (in the form of the dwarf that beguiled Vali); He that is
endued with effulgence like unto the Sun's; He that endures all pairs of
opposites (such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, etc.); He that is
the foremost Refuge of all things (DLIX--DLXVIII); He that is armed with
the best of bows (called Saranga); He that was divested of His battle-axe
(by Rama of Bhrigu's race);[603] He that is fierce; He that is the giver
of all objects of desire; He that is so tall as to touch the very heavens
with his head (in allusion to the form He assumed at Valis sacrifice); He
whose vision extends over the entire universe; He that is Vyasa (who
distributed the Vedas); He that is the Master of speech or all learning;
He that has started into existence without the intervention of genital
organs (DLXVIII--DLXXVI); He that is hymned with the three (foremost)
Samans; He that is the singer of the Samans; He that is the Extinction of
all worldly attachments (in consequence of His being the embodiment of
Renunciation); He that is the Medicine; He that is the Physician (who
applies the medicine); He that has ordained the fourth or last mode of
life called renunciation (for enabling His creatures to attain to
emancipation); He that causes the passions of His worshippers to be
quieted (with a view to give them tranquillity of soul); He that is
contented (in consequence of His utter dissociation with all worldly
objects); He that is the Refuge of devotion and tranquillity of Soul
(DLXXVII--DLXXXV); He that is possessed of beautiful limbs; He that is
the giver of tranquillity of soul; He that is Creator; He that sports in
joy on the bosom of the earth; He that sleeps (in Yoga) lying on the body
of the prince of snakes, Sesha, after the universal dissolution; the
Benefactor of kine; (or, He that took a human form for relieving the
earth of the weight of her population); the Master of the universe; the
Protector of the universe; He that is endued with eyes like those of the
bull; He that cherishes Righteousness with love (DLXXXVI--DXCV): He that
is the unreturning hero; He whose soul has been withdrawn from all
attachments; He that reduces to a subtle form the universe at the time of
the universal dissolution; He that does good to His afflicted
worshippers; He whose name, as soon as heard, cleanses the hearer of all
his sins; He who has the auspicious whorl on His breast; He in whom
dwells the goddess of Prosperity for ever; He who was chosen by Lakshmi
(the goddess of Prosperity) as her Lord; He that is the foremost one of
all Beings endued with prosperity (DXCVI--DCIV); He that give prosperity
unto His worshippers; the Master of prosperity; He that always lives with
those that are endued with prosperity; He that is the receptacle of all
kinds of prosperity; He that gives prosperity unto all persons of
righteous acts according to the measure of their righteousness; He that
holds the goddess of Prosperity on his bosom; He that bestows prosperity
upon those that hear of, praise, and mediate on Him; He that is the
embodiment of that condition which represents the attainment of
unattainable happiness; He that is possessed of every kind of beauty; He
that is the Refuge of the three worlds (DCV--DCXIV); He that is possessed
of beautiful eye; He that is possessed of beautiful limbs; He that is
possessed of a hundred sources of delight; He that represents the highest
delight; He that is the Master of all the luminaries in the firmament
(for it is He that maintains them in their places and orbits); He that
has subjugated His soul; He whose soul is not swayed by any superior
Being; He that is always of beautiful acts; He whose doubts have all been
dispelled (for He is said to behold the whole universe as an Amlaka in
His palm) (DCXV--DCXXIII); He that transcends all creatures; He whose
vision extends in all directions: He that has no Master; He that at all
times transcends all changes; He that (in the form of Rama) had to lie
down on that bare ground; He that adorns the earth (by His incarnations);
He that is puissance's self; He that transcends all grief; He that
dispels the griefs of all His worshippers as soon as they remember His
(DCXXIV--DCXXXII); He that is possessed of effulgence, He that is
worshipped by all; He that is the water-pot (as all things reside within
Him); He that is of pure soul; He that cleanses all as soon as they hear
of him; He that is free and unrestrained; He whose car never turns away
from battles; He that is possessed of great wealth; He whose prowess is
incapable of being measured (DCXXXIII--DCXLI); He that is the slayer of
the Asura named Kalanemi; He that is the Hero; He that has taken birth in
the race of Sura; He that is the Lord of all the deities; the soul of the
three worlds; the Master of the three worlds; He that has the solar and
lunar rays for his hair; the slayer of Kesi; He that destroys all things
(at the universal dissolution) (DCXLII--DCL); the Deity from whom the
fruition of all desires is sought; He that grants the wishes of all; He
that has desires; He that has a handsome form; He that is endued with
thorough knowledge of Srutis and Smritis; He that is possessed of a form
that is indescribable by attributes; He whose brightest rays overwhelm
heaven; He that has no end; He that (in the form of Arjuna or Nara)
acquired vast wealth on the occasion of his campaign of conquest
(DCLI--DCLX); He who is the foremost object of silent recitation, of
sacrifice, of the Vedas, and of all religious acts; He that is the
creator of penances and the like; He that is the form of (the grandsire)
Brahman, He that is the augmentor of penances; He that is conversant with
Brahma; He that is of the form of Brahmana; He that has for His limbs Him
that is called Brahma; He that knows all the Vedas and everything in the
universe; He that is always fond of Brahmanas and of whom the Brahmanas
also are fond (DCLXI--DCLXX); He whose footsteps cover vast areas; He
whose feats are mighty; He who is possessed of vast energy; He that is
identical with Vasuki, the king of the snakes; He that is the foremost of
all sacrifices; He that is Japa, that first of sacrifices; He that is the
foremost of all offerings made in sacrifices (DCLXXI--DCLXXVIII);[604] He
that is hymned by all; He that loves to be hymned (by his worshippers);
He that is himself the hymns uttered by His worshippers; He that is the
very act of hymning; He that is the person that hymns; He that is fond of
battling (with everything that is evil); He that is full in every
respect; He that fills others with every kind of affluence; He that
destroys all sins as soon as He is remembered; He whose acts are all
righteous; He that transcends all kinds of disease (DCLXXIX--DCLXXXIX);
He that is endued with the speed of the mind; He that is the creator and
promulgator of all kinds of learning; He whose vital seed is gold; He
that is giver of wealth (being identical with Kuvera the Lord of
treasures); He that takes away all the wealth of the Asuras; the son of
Vasudeva; He in whom all creatures dwell; He whose mind dwells in all
things in thorough identity with them; He that takes away the sins of all
who seek refuge in him (DCXC--DCXCVIII); He that is attainable by the
righteous; He whose acts are always good; He that is the one entity in
the universe; He that displays Himself in diverse forms; He that is the
refuge of all those that are conversant with truth; He who has the
greatest of heroes for his troops;[605] He that is the foremost of the
Yadavas; He that is the abode of the righteous He that sports in joy (in
the woods of Brinda) on the banks of Yamuna (DCXCIX--DCCVVII); He in whom
all created things dwell; the deity that overwhelms the universe with His
Maya (illusion); He in whom all foremost of Beings become merged (when
they achieve their emancipation) He whose hunger is never gratified; He
that humbles the pride of all; He that fills the righteous with just
pride; He that swells with joy; He that is incapable of being seized; He
that has never been vanquished (DCCVII--DCCXVI); He that is of universal
form; He that is of vast form; He whose form blazes forth with energy and
effulgence; He that is without form (as determined by acts); He that is
of diverse forms; (He that is unmanifest); He that is of a hundred forms;
He that is of a hundred faces (DCCXVII--DCCXXIV); He that is one; He that
is many (through illusion); He that is full of felicity; He that forms
the one grand topic of investigation; He from whom is this all; He that
is called THAT; He that is the highest Refuge; He that confines Jiva
within material causes; He that is coveted by all; He that took birth in
the race of Madhu; He that is exceedingly affectionate towards His
worshippers (DCCXXV--DCCXXXV); He that is of golden complexion; He whose
limbs are like gold (in hue); He that is possessed of beautiful limbs; He
whose person is decked with Angadas made with sandal-paste; He that is
the slayer of heroes; He that has no equal; He that is like cipher (in
consequence of no attributes being affirmable of Him); He that stands in
need of no blessings (in consequence of His fulness); He that never
swerves from His own nature and puissance and knowledge; He that is
mobile in the form of wind (DCCXXXVI--DCCXLV); He that never identifies
Himself with anything that is not-soul;[606] He that confers honours on
His worshippers; He that is honoured by all; He that is the Lord of the
three worlds; He that upholds the three worlds; He that is possessed of
intelligence and memory capable of holding in His mind the contents of
all treatises; He that took birth in a sacrifice; He that is worthy of
the highest praise; He whose intelligence and memory are never futile; He
that upholds the earth (DCCXLVI--DCCLV); He that pours forth heat in the
form of the Sun; He that is the bearer of great beauty of limbs; He that
is the foremost of all bearers of weapons; He that accepts the flowery
and leafy offerings made to Him by His worshippers; He that has subdued
all his passions and grinds all His foes; He that has none to walk before
Him; He that has four horns; He that is the elder brother of Gada
(DCCLVI--DCCLXIV); He that has four arms; He from whom the four Purushas
have sprung; He that is the refuge of the four modes of life and the four
orders of men; He that is of four souls (Mind, Understanding,
Consciousness, and Memory); He from whom spring the four objects of life,
viz., Righteousness, Wealth, Pleasure, and Emancipation; He that is
conversant with the four Vedas; He that has displayed only a fraction of
His puissance (DCCLXV--DCCLXXII); He that sets the wheel of the world to
revolve round and round; He whose soul is dissociated from all worldly
attachments; He that is incapable of being vanquished; He that cannot be
transcended; He that is exceedingly difficult of being attained; He that
is difficult of being approached; He that is difficult of access; He that
is difficult of being brought within the heart (by even Yogins); He that
slays even the most powerful foes (among the Danavas)
(DCCLXXIII--DCCLXXXI); He that has beautiful limbs; He that takes the
essence of all things in the universe; He that owns the most beautiful
warp and woof (for weaving this texture of fabric of the universe); He
that weaves with ever-extending warp and woof; He whose acts are done by
Indra; He whose acts are great; He who has no acts undone; He who has
composed all the Vedas and scriptures (DCCLXXXII--DCCLXXXIX); He whose
birth is high; He that is exceedingly handsome; He whose heart is full of
commiseration; He that has precious gems in His navel; He that has
excellent knowledge for His eye; He that is worthy of worship by Brahman
himself and other foremost ones in the universe; He that is giver of
food; He that assumed horns at the time of the universal dissolution; He
that has always subjugated His foes most wonderfully; He that knows all
things; He that is ever victorious over those that are of irresistible
prowess (DCCXC--DCCXCIX); He whose limbs are like gold; He that is
incapable of being agitated (by wrath or aversion or other passion); He
that is Master of all those who are masters of all speech; He that is the
deepest lake; He that is the deepest pit; He that transcends the
influence of Time; He in whom the primal elements are established
(DCCC--DCCCVI); He that gladdens the earth; He that grants fruits which
are as agreeable as the Kunda flowers (Jasmim pubescens, Linn); He that
gave away the earth unto Kasyapa (in His incarnation as Rama); He that
extinguishes the three kinds of misery (mentioned in the Sankhya
philosophy) like a rain-charged cloud cooling the heat of the earth by
its downpour; He that cleanses all creatures; He that has none to urge
Him; He that drank nectar; He that has an undying body; He that is
possessed of omniscience; He that has face and eyes turned towards every
direction (DCCCVIII--DCCCXVI); He that is easily won (with, that is, such
gifts as consist of flowers and leaves); He that has performed excellent
vows; He that is crowned with success by Himself; He that is victorious
over all foes; He that scorches all foes; He that is the ever-growing and
tall Banian that overtops all other trees; He that is the sacred fig tree
(Ficus glomerata, Willd); He that is the Ficus religiosa; (or, He that is
not durable, in consequence of His being all perishable forms in the
universe even as he is all the imperishable forms that exist); He that is
the slayer of Chanura of the Andhra country (DCCCXVII--DCCCXXV); He that
is endued with a thousand rays; He that has seven tongues (in the forms
of Kali, Karali, etc.); He that has seven flames (in consequence of His
being identical with the deity of fire); He that has seven horses for
bearing His vehicle; (or, He that owns the steed called Sapta); He that
is formless; He that is sinless: He that is inconceivable; He that
dispels all fears; He that destroys all fears (DCCCXXVI--DCCCXXXIV); He
that is minute; He that is gross; He that is emaciated; He that is
adipose; He that is endued with attributes; He that transcends all
attributes; He that is unseizable; He that suffers Himself to be easily
seized (by His worshippers); He that has an excellent face; He that has
for His descendants the people of the accidental regions; He that extends
the creation consisting of the fivefold primal elements
(DCCCXXXV--DCCCXLVI); He that bears heavy weights (in the form of
Ananta); He that has been declared by the Vedas; He that is devoted to
Yoga; He that is the lord of all Yogins; He that is the giver of all
wishes; He that affords an asylum to those that seek it; He that sets
Yogins to practise Yoga anew after their return to life upon the
conclusion of their life of felicity in heaven; He that invests Yogins
with puissance even after the exhaustion of their merits; He that has
goodly leaves (in the form of the Schhandas of the Vedas, Himself being
the tree of the world); He that causes the winds to blow
(DCCCXLVII--DCCCLVI); He that is armed with the bow (in the form of
Rama); He that is conversant with the science of arms; He that is the rod
of chastisement; He that is chastiser; He that executes all sentences of
chastisement; He that has never been vanquished; He that is competent in
all acts; He that sets all persons to their respective duties; He that
has none to set Him to any work; He that has no Yama to slay Him
(DCCLVII--DCCCLXVI); He that is endued with heroism and prowess; He that
has the attribute of Sattwa (Goodness); He that is identical with Truth;
He that is devoted to Truth and Righteousness; He that is sought by those
who are resolved to achieve emancipation; (or, He towards whom the
universe proceeds when the dissolution comes); He that deserves to have
all objects which His worshippers present unto Him; He that is worthy of
being adored (with hymns and flowers and other offering of reverence); He
that does good to all; He that enhances the delights of all
(DCCCLXVII--DCCCLXV); He whose track is through the firmament; He that
blazes forth in His own effulgence; He that is endued with great beauty;
He that eats the offerings made on the sacrificial fire; He that dwells
everywhere and is endued with supreme puissance; He that sucks the
moisture of the earth in the form of the Sun; He that has diverse
desires; He that brings forth all things; He that is the parent of the
universe; He that has the Sun for His eye (DCCCLXXVI--DCCCLXXXV); He that
is Infinite; He that accepts all sacrificial offerings; He that enjoys
Prakriti in the form of Mind; He that is giver of felicity; He that has
taken repeated births (for the protection of righteousness and the
righteous); He that is First-born of all existent things; He that
transcends despair (in consequence of the fruition of all His wishes); He
that forgives the righteous when they trip; He that is the foundation
upon which the universe rests; He that is most wonderful
(DCCCLXXXVI--DCCCXCV); He that is existent from the beginning of Time; He
that has been existing from before the birth of the Grandsire and others;
He that is of a tawny hue; (or, He that discovers or illumines all
existent things by His rays); He that assumed the form of the great Boar;
He that exists even when all things are dissolved; He that is the giver
of all blessings; He that creates blessings; He that is identifiable with
all blessings; He that enjoys blessings; He that is able to scatter
blessings (DCCCXXI--CMV); He that is without wrath; He that lies
ensconced in folds (in the form of the snake Sesha); (or, He that is
adorned with ear-rings); He that is armed with the discus; He that is
endued with great prowess; He whose sway is regulated by the high
precepts of the Srutis and the Smritis; He that is incapable of being
described by the aid of speech; He whom the Vedantas have striven to
express with the aid of speech; He that is the dew which cools those who
are afflicted with the three kinds of grief; He that lives in all bodies,
endued with the capacity of dispelling darkness (CMVI--CMXIV); He that is
divested of wrath; He that is well-skilled in accomplishing all acts by
thought, word, and deed; He that can accomplish all acts within the
shortest period of time; He that destroys the wicked; He that is the
foremost of all forgiving persons; He that is foremost of all persons
endued with knowledge; He that transcends all fear; He whose names and
feats, heard and recited, lead to Righteousness (CMXV--CMXXII), He that
rescues the Righteous from the tempestuous ocean of the world; He that
destroys the wicked; He that is Righteousness; He that dispels all evil
dreams; He that destroys all bad paths for leading His worshippers to the
good path of emancipation; He that protects the universe by staying in
the attribute of Sattwa; He that walks along the good path; He that is
Life; He that exists overspreading the universe (CMXXIII--CMXXXI); He
that is of infinite forms; He that is endued with infinite prosperity; He
that has subdued wrath; He that destroys the fears of the righteous; He
that gives just fruits, on every side, to sentient beings according to
their thoughts and acts; He that is immeasurable Soul; He that bestows
diverse kinds of fruits on deserving persons for their diverse acts; He
that sets diverse commands (on gods and men); He that attaches to every
act its proper fruit (CMXXXII--CMXL); He that has no beginning; He that
is the receptacle of all causes as well as of the earth; He that has the
goddess of Prosperity ever by his side; He that is the foremost of all
heroes; He that is adorned with beautiful armlets; He that produces all
creatures; He that is the original cause of the birth of all creatures;
He that is the terror of all the wicked Asuras; He that is endued with
terrible prowess (CMXLI--CMXLIX); He that is the receptacle and abode of
the five primal elements; He that gulps down His throat all creatures at
the time of the universal dissolution; He whose smile is as agreeable as
the sight of flowers; (or, He who laughs in the form of flowers); He that
is always wakeful; He that stays at the head of all creatures; He whose
conduct consists of those acts which the Righteous do; He that revives
the dead (as in the case of Parikshit and others); He that is the initial
syllable Om; He that has ordained all righteous acts (CML--CMLVIII); He
that displays the truth about the Supreme Soul; He that is the abode of
the five life-breaths and the senses; He that is the food which supports
the life of living creatures; He that causes all living creatures to live
with the aid of the life-breath called Prana; He that is the great topic
of every system of philosophy; He that is the One Soul in the universe;
He that transcends birth, decrepitude, and death (CMLIX--CMLXV); He that
rescues the universe in consequence of the sacred syllable Bhuh, Bhuvah,
Swah, and the others with which Homa offerings are made; He that is the
great rescuer; He that is the sire of all; He that is the sire of even
the Grandsire (Brahman); He that is of the form of Sacrifice; He that is
the Lord of all sacrifices (being the great deity that is adored in
them); He that is the sacrificer; He that has sacrifices for his limbs;
He that upholds all sacrifices (CMLXXVI--CMLXXXV); He that protects
sacrifices; He that has created sacrifices; He that is the foremost of
all performers of sacrifices; He that enjoys the rewards of all
sacrifices; He that causes the accomplishment of all sacrifices; He that
completes all sacrifices by accepting the full libation at the end; He
that is identical with such sacrifices as are performed without desire of
fruit; He that is the food which sustains all living creatures; He that
is also the eater of that food (CMLXXVI--CMLXXXIV); He that is Himself
the cause of His existence; He that is self-born; He that penetrated
through the solid earth (and repairing to the nether regions slew
Hiranyaksha and others); He that sings the Samans; He that is the
delighter of Devaki; He that is the creator of all; He that is the Lord
of the earth; He that is the destroyer of the sins of his worshippers
(CMLXXXV--CMXXCII); He that bears the conch (Panchajanya) in His hands;
He that bears the sword of knowledge and illusion; He that sets the cycle
of the Yugas to revolve ceaselessly; He that invests Himself with
consciousness and senses; He that is endued with the mace of the most
solid understanding. He that is armed with a car-wheel; He that is
incapable of being agitated; He that is armed with all kinds of weapons
(CMXCIII--M). Om, salutations to Him!

'Even thus have I recited to thee, without any exception, the thousand
excellent names of the high-souled Kesava whose glory should always be
sung That man who hears the names every day or who recites them every
day, never meets with any evil either here or hereafter. If a Brahmana
does this he succeeds in mastering the Vedanta; if a Kshatriya does it,
he becomes always successful in battle. A Vaisya, by doing it, becomes
possessed of affluence, while a Sudra earns great happiness. If one
becomes desirous of earning the merit of righteousness, one succeeds in
earning it (by hearing or reciting these names). If it is wealth that one
desires, one succeeds in earning wealth (by acting in this way). So also
the man who wishes for enjoyments of the senses succeeds in enjoying all
kinds of pleasures, and the man desirous of offspring acquires offspring
(by pursuing this course of conduct). That man who with devotion and
perseverance and heart wholly turned towards him, recites these thousand
names of Vasudeva every day, after having purified himself, succeeds in
acquiring great fame, a position of eminence among his kinsmen, enduring
prosperity, and lastly, that which is of the highest benefit to him
(viz., emancipation itself). Such a man never meets with fear at any
time, and acquires great prowess and energy. Disease never afflicts him;
splendour of complexion, strength, beauty, and accomplishments become
his. The sick become hale, the afflicted become freed from their
afflictions; the affrighted become freed from fear, and he that is
plunged in calamity becomes freed from calamity. The man who hymns the
praises of that foremost of Beings by reciting His thousand names with
devotion succeeds in quickly crossing all difficulties. That mortal who
takes refuge in Vasudeva and who becomes devoted to Him, becomes freed of
all sins and attains to eternal Brahma. They who are devoted to Vasudeva
have never to encounter any evil. They become freed from the fear of
birth, death, decrepitude, and disease. That man who with devotion and
faith recites this hymn (consisting of the thousand names of Vasudeva)
succeeds in acquiring felicity of soul, forgiveness of disposition,
Prosperity, intelligence, memory, and fame. Neither wrath, nor jealousy,
nor cupidity, nor evil understanding ever appears in those men of
righteousness who are devoted to that foremost of beings. The firmament
with the sun, moon and stars, the welkin, the points of the compass, the
earth and the ocean, are all held and supported by the prowess of the
high-souled Vasudeva. The whole mobile and immobile universe with the
deities, Asuras, and Gandharvas, Yakshas, Uragas and Rakshasas, is under
the sway of Krishna. The senses, mind, understanding, life, energy,
strength and memory, it has been said, have Vasudeva for their soul.
Indeed, this body that is called Kshetra, and the intelligent soul
within, that is called the knower of Kshetra, also have Vasudeva for
their soul. Conduct (consisting of practices) is said to be the foremost
of all topics treated of in the scriptures. Righteousness has conduct for
its basis. The unfading Vasudeva is said to be the lord of righteousness.
The Rishis, the Pitris, the deities, the great (primal) elements, the
metals, indeed, the entire mobile and immobile universe, has sprung from
Narayana. Yoga, the Sankhya Philosophy, knowledge, all mechanical arts,
the Vedas, the diverse scriptures, and all learning, have sprung from
Janardana. Vishnu is the one great element or substance which has spread
itself out into multifarious forms. Covering the three worlds, He the
soul of all things, enjoys them all. His glory knows no diminution, and
He it is that is the Enjoyer of the universe (as its Supreme Lord). This
hymn in praise of the illustrious Vishnu composed by Vyasa, should be
recited by that person who wishes to acquire happiness and that which is
the highest benefit (viz., emancipation). Those persons that worship and
adore the Lord of the universe, that deity who is inborn and possessed of
blazing effulgence, who is the origin or cause of the universe, who knows
on deterioration, and who is endued with eyes that are as large and
beautiful as the petals of the lotus, have never to meet with any
discomfiture.'"



SECTION CL

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, O thou of great wisdom, O thou that art
conversant with all branches of knowledge, what is that subject of silent
recitation by reciting which every day one may acquire the merit of
righteousness in a large measure? What is that Mantra for recitation
which bestows success if recited on the occasion of setting out on a
journey or in entering a new building, or at the commencement of any
undertaking, or on the occasion of sacrifices in honour of the deities or
of the Pitris? It behoveth thee to tell me what indeed, what Mantra it
is, which propitiates all malevolent influences, or leads to prosperity
or growth, or protection from evil, or the destruction of foes, or the
dispelling of fears, and which, at the same time, is consistent with the
Vedas.'

"Bhishma said, 'Hear, O king, with concentrated, attention, what that
Mantra is which was declared by Vyasa. It was ordained by Savitri and is
possessed of great excellence. It is capable of cleansing a person
immediately of all his sins. Hear, O sinless one, as I recite to thee the
ordinances in respect of that Mantra. Indeed, O chief of the sons of
Pandu, by listening to those ordinances, one becomes cleansed of all
one's sins. One who recites this Mantra day and night becomes never
stained by sin. I shall now declare it to thee what that Mantra is. Do
thou listen with concentrated attention. Indeed, the man that hears it
becomes endued with long life, O prince, and attaining to the fruition of
all his wishes, sports in felicity both here and hereafter. This Mantra,
O king, was daily recited by the foremost of royal sages devoted to the
practice to Kshatriya duties and steadily observant of the vow of truth.
Indeed, O tiger among kings, those monarchs who, with restrained senses
and tranquil soul, recite this Mantra every day, succeed in acquiring
unrivalled prosperity--Salutations to Vasishtha of high vows after having
bowed with reverence unto Parasara, that Ocean of the Vedas! Salutations
to the great snake Ananta, and salutations to all those who are crowned
with success, and who are of unfading glory! Salutations to the Rishis,
and unto Him that is the Highest of the High, the god of gods, and the
giver of boons unto all those that are foremost. Salutations unto Him of
a thousand heads, Him that is most auspicious, Him that has a thousand
names, viz., Janardana! Aja. Ekapada, Ahivradhna, the unvanquished
Pinakin, Rita Pitrirupa, the three-eyed Maheswara, Vrishakapi, Sambhu,
Havana, and Iswara--these are the celebrated Rudras, eleven in number,
who are the lords of all the worlds. Even these eleven high-souled ones
have been mentioned as a hundred in the Satarudra (of the Vedas). Ansa,
Bhaga, Mitra, Varuna the lord of waters, Dhatri, Aryaman, Jayanta,
Bhaskara, Tvashtri, Pushan, Indra and Vishnu, are said to comprise a tale
of twelve. These twelve are called Adityas and they are the sons of
Kasyapa as the Sruti declares. Dhara, Dhruva, Some, Savitra. Anila,
Anala, Pratyusha, and Prabhava, are the eight Vasus named in the
scriptures, Nasataya and Dasra are said to be the two Aswins. They are
the sons of Martanda born of his spouse Samjna, from whose nostrils they
came out. After this I shall recite the names of those who are the
witnesses of all acts in the worlds. They take note of all sacrifices, of
all gifts, of all good acts. Those lords among the deities behold
everything although they are invisible. Indeed, they behold all the good
and bad acts of all beings. They are Mrityu, Kala, the Viswedevas, the
Pitris endued with forms, the great Rishis possessed of wealth of
penances, the Munis, and others crowned with success and devoted to
penances and emancipation. These of sweet smiles, bestow diverse benefits
upon those men that recite their names. Verily, endued with celestial
energy, they bestow diverse regions of felicity created by the Grandsire
upon such men. They reside in all the worlds and attentively note all
acts. By reciting the names of those lords of all living creatures, one
always becomes endued with righteousness and wealth and enjoyments in
copious measure. One acquires hereafter diverse regions of auspiciousness
and felicity created by the Lord of the universe. These three and thirty
deities, who are the lords of all beings as also Nandiswara of huge body,
and that pre-eminent one who has the bull for the device on his banner,
and those masters of all the worlds, viz., the followers and associates
of him called Ganeswara, and those called Saumyas, and called the Rudras,
and those called the Yogas, and those that are known as the Bhutas, and
the luminaries in the firmament, the Rivers, the sky, the prince of birds
(viz., Garuda), all those persons on earth who have become crowned with
success in consequence of their penances and who are existing in an
immobile or mobile form, the Himavat, all the mountains, the four Oceans,
the followers and associates of Bhava who are possessed of prowess equal
to that of Bhava himself, the illustrious and ever-victorious Vishnu, and
Skanda, and Ambika,--these are the great souls by reciting whose name
with restrained senses, one becomes cleansed of all sins. After this I
shall recite the names of those foremost Rishis who are known as Manavas.
They are Yavakrita, and Raibhya, and Arvavasu, and Paravasu, and Aushija,
and Kakshivat, and Vala the son of Angiras. Then comes Kanwa the son of
the Rishi Medhatithi, and Varishada. All these are endued with the energy
of Brahma and have been spoken of (in the scriptures) as creators of the
universe. They have sprung from Rudra and Anala and the Vasus. By
reciting their names people obtain great benefits. Indeed, by doing good
deeds on earth, people sport in joy in heaven, with the deities. These
Rishis are the priests of Indra. They live in the east. That man who,
with rapt attention, recites the names of these Rishis, succeeds in
ascending to the regions of Indra and obtaining great honours there.
Unmachu, Pramchu, Swastyatreya of great energy, Dridhavya, Urdhvavahu,
Trinasoma, Angiras, and Agastya of great energy, the son of
Mitravaruna,--these seven are the Ritwiks of Yama the king of the dead,
and dwell in the southern quarter. Dridheyu and Riteyu, and Pariyadha of
great fame, and Ekata, and Dwita, and Trita--the last three endued with
splendour like that of the sun,--and Atri's son of righteous soul, viz.,
the Rishi Saraswata,--these seven who had acted as Ritwiks in the great
sacrifice of Varuna--have taken up their abodes in the western quarter.
Atri, the illustrious Vasishtha, the great Rishi Kasyapa, Gotama,
Bharadwaja, Viswamitra, the son of Kusika, and Richika's fierce son
Jamadagni of great energy,--these seven are the Ritwiks of the Lord of
treasures and dwell in the northern quarter. There are seven other Rishis
that live in all directions without being confined to any particular one.
They, it is, who are the inducers of fame and of all this beneficial to
men, and they have been sung as the creators of the worlds. Dharma, Kama,
Kala, Vasu, Vasuki, Ananta, and Kapila,--these seven are the upholders of
the world. Rama, Vyasa, Drona's son Aswatthaman, are the other Rishis
(that are regarded as the foremost). These are the great Rishis as
distributed into seven groups, each group consisting of seven. They are
the creators of that peace and good that men enjoy. They are said to be
the Regents of the several points of the compass. One should turn one's
face to that direction in which one of these Rishis live if one wishes to
worship him. Those Rishis are the creators of all creatures and have been
regarded as the cleansers of all. Samvarta, Merusavarna, the righteous
Markandeya, and Sankhya and Yoga, and Narada and the great Rishi
Durvasa,--these are endued with severe penance and great self-restraint,
and are celebrated over the three worlds. There are others who are equal
to Rudra himself. They live in the region of Brahman. By naming them with
reverence a sonless man obtains a son, and a pool man obtains wealth.
Indeed, by naming them, one acquires success in religion, and wealth and
pleasure. One should also take the name of that celebrated king who was
Emperor of all the earth and equal to a Prajapati, viz., that foremost of
monarchs, Prithu, the son of Vena. The earth became his daughter (from
love and affection). One should also name Pururavas of the Solar race and
equal unto Mahendra himself in prowess. He was the son of Ila and
celebrated over the three worlds. One should, indeed, take the name of
that dear son of Vudha. One should also take the name of Bharata, that
hero celebrated over the three worlds. He also who in the Krita age
adored the gods in a grand Gomedha sacrifice, viz., Rantideva of great
splendour, who was equal unto Mahadeva himself, should be named. Endued
with penances, possessed of every auspicious mark, the source of every
kind of benefit to the world, he was the conqueror of the universes. One
should also take the name of the royal sage Sweta of illustrious fame. He
had gratified the great Mahadeva and it was for his sake that Andhaka was
slain. One should also take the name of the royal sage Bhagiratha of
great fame, who, through the grace of Mahadeva, succeeded in bringing
down the sacred river from heaven (for flowing over the earth and
cleansing all human beings of their sins). It was Bhagiratha who caused
the ashes of the sixty thousand sons of Sagara to be overflowed with the
sacred waters of Ganga and thereby rescued them from their sin. Indeed,
one should take the names of all these that were endued with the blazing
effulgence of fire, great beauty of person, and high energy. Some of them
were of awe-inspiring forms and great might. Verily, one should take the
names of these deities and Rishis and kings, those lords of the
universe,--who are enhancers of fame. Sankhya, and Yoga which is highest
of the high, and Havya and Kavya and that refuge of all the Srutis, viz.,
Supreme Brahma, have been declared to be the sources of great benefit to
all creatures. These are sacred and sin-cleansing and have been spoken of
very highly. These are the foremost of medicines for allaying all
diseases, and are the inducers of the success in respect of all deeds.
Restraining one's senses, one should, O Bharata, take the names of these,
morning and evening. It is these that protect. It is these that shower
rain. It is these that shine and give light and heat. It is these that
blow. It is these that create all things. These are regarded as the
foremost of all, as the leaders of the universe, as highly clever in the
accomplishment of all things, as endued with forgiveness, as complete
masters of the senses. Indeed, it has been said that they dispel all the
evils to which human beings are subject. These high-souled ones are the
witnesses of all good and bad deeds. Rising up in the morning one should
take their names, for by this, one is sure to acquire all that is good.
He who takes the names of them becomes freed from the fear of fires and
of thieves. Such a man never finds his way obstructed by any impediment.
By taking the names of these high-souled ones, one becomes free from bad
dreams of every kind. Cleared from every sin, such men take birth in
auspicious families. That regenerate person who, with restrained senses,
recites these names on the occasions of performing the initiatory rites
of sacrifices and other religious observances, becomes, as the
consequence thereof, endued with righteousness, devoted to the study of
the soul, possessed of forgiveness and self-restraint, and free from
malice. If a man that is afflicted with disease recites them, he becomes
freed from his sin in the form of disease. By reciting them within a
house, all evils are dispelled from the inmates. By reciting them within
a field, the growth is helped of all kinds of crops. Reciting them at the
time of setting out on a journey, or while one is away from one's home,
one meets with good fortune. These names lead to the protection of one's
own self, of one's children and spouses, of one's wealth, and of one's
seeds, and plants. The Kshatriya who recites these names at the time of
joining a battle sees destruction overtake his foes and good fortune
crown him and his party. The man who recites these names on the occasions
of performing the rites in honour of the deities or the Pitris, helps the
Pitris and deities eat the sacrificial Havya and Kavya. The man that
recites them becomes freed from fear of diseases and beasts of prey, of
elephants and thieves. His load of anxiety becomes lightened, and he
becomes freed from every sin. By reciting these excellent Savitri Mantras
on board a vessel, or in a vehicle, or in the courts of kings, one
attains to high success. There where these Mantras are recited, fire does
not burn wood. There children do not die, nor snakes dwell. Indeed, at
such places, there can be no fear of the king, nor of Pisachas and
Rakshasas.[607] Verily, the man who recites these Mantras ceases to have
any fear of fire or water or wind or beasts of prey. These Savitri
Mantras, recited duly, contribute to the peace and well-being of all the
four orders. Those men who recite them with reverence become freed from
every sorrow and at last attain to a high end. Even these are the results
achieved by them that recite these Savitri Mantras which are of the form
of Brahma. That man who recites these Mantras in the midst of kine sees
his kine become fruitful. Whether when setting out on a journey, or
entering a house on coming back, one should recite these Mantras on every
occasion. These Mantras constitute a great mystery of the Rishis and are
the very highest of those which they silently recite. Even such are these
Mantras unto them who practise the duty of recitation and pour libations
on the sacrificial fire. This that I have said unto thee is the excellent
opinion of Parasara. It was recited in former days unto Sakra himself.
Representing as it does Truth or Eternal Brahman. I have declared it in
full to thee. It constitutes that heart of all creatures, and is the
highest Sruti. All the princes of the race of Soma and of Surya, viz.,
the Raghavas and the Kauravas, recite these Mantras every day after
having purified themselves, These constitute the highest end of human
creatures. There is rescue from every trouble and calamity in the daily
recitation of the names of the deities of the seven Rishis, and of
Dhruva. Indeed, such recitation speedily frees one from distress. The
sages of olden times, viz., Kasyapa, Gotama, and others, and Bhrigu
Angiras and Atri and others, and Sukra, Agastya, and Vrihaspati, and
others, all of whom are regenerate Rishis, have adored these Mantras.
Approved of by the son of Bharadwaja, these Mantras were attained by the
sons of Richika. Verily, having acquired them again from Vasishtha, Sakra
and the Vasus went forth to battle and succeeded in subjugating the
Danavas. That man who makes a present of a hundred kine with their horns
covered with plates of gold unto a Brahmana possessed of much learning
and well-conversant with the Vedas, and he who causes the excellent
Bharata story to be recited in his house every day, are said to acquire
equal merits. By reciting the name of Bhrigu one's righteousness becomes
enhanced. By bowing to Vasishtha one's energy become enhanced. By bowing
unto Raghu, one becomes victorious in battle. By reciting the praises of
the Aswins, one becomes freed from diseases. I have thus, O king, told
thee of the Savitri Mantras which are identical with eternal Brahman. If
thou wishest to question me on any other topic thou mayst do so. I shall,
O Bharata, answer thee.'"



SECTION CLI

"Yudhishthira said, 'Who deserve to be worshipped? Who are they unto whom
we should bow? How, indeed, should we behave towards whom? What course of
conduct, O grandsire, towards what classes of persons is regarded
faultless?'

"Bhishma said, 'The humiliation of Brahmanas would humiliate the very
deities. By bowing unto Brahmanas one does not, O Yudhishthira, incur any
fault. They, deserve to be worshipped. They deserve to have our
Salutations. Thou shouldst behave towards them as if they are thy sons.
Indeed, it is those men endued with great wisdom that uphold all the
worlds. The Brahmanas are the great causeways of Righteousness in respect
of all the worlds. Their happiness consists in renouncing all kinds of
wealth. They are devoted to the vow of restraining speech. They are
agreeable to all creatures, and observant of diverse excellent vows. They
are the refuge of all creatures in the universe. They are the authors of
all the regulations which govern the worlds. They are possessed of great
fame Penances are always their great wealth. Their power consists in
speech. Their energy flows from the duties they observe. Conversant with
all duties, they are possessed of minute vision, so that they are
cognizant of the subtlest considerations. They are of righteous desires.
They live the observance of well-performed duties. They are the causeways
of Righteousness. The four kinds of living creatures exist, depending
upon them as their refuge. They are the path or road along which all
should go. They are the guides of all. They are the eternal upholders of
all the sacrifices. They always uphold the heavy burdens of sires and
grandsires. They never droop under heavy weights even when passing along
difficult-roads like strong cattle. They are attentive to the
requirements of Piths and deities and guests. They are entitled to eat
the first portions of Havya and Kavya. By the very food they eat, they
rescue the three worlds from great fear. They are as it were, the Island
(for refuge) for all worlds. They are the eyes of all persons endued with
sight. The wealth they possess consists of all the branches of knowledge
known by the name of Siksha and all the Srutis. Endued with great skill,
they are conversant with the most subtle relations of things. They are
well-acquainted with the end of all things, and their thoughts are always
employed upon the science of the soul. They are endued with the knowledge
of the beginning, the middle, and the end of all things, and they are
persons in whom doubts no longer exist in consequence of feeling certain
of their knowledge. They are fully aware of the distinctions between what
is superior and what is inferior. They it is who attain to the highest
end. Freed from all attachments, cleansed of all sins, transcending all
pairs of opposites (such as heat and cold, happiness and misery, etc.),
they are unconnected with all worldly things. Deserving of every honour,
they are always held in great esteem by persons endued with knowledge and
high souls. They cast equal eyes on sandal-paste and filth or dirt, on
what is food and what is not rood. They see with an equal eye their brown
vestments of coarse cloth and fabrics of silk and animal skins. They
would live for many days together without eating any food, and dry up
their limbs by such abstention from all sustenance. They devote
themselves earnestly to the study of the Vedas, restraining their senses.
They would make gods of those that are not gods, and not gods of those
that are gods. Enraged, they can create other worlds and other Regents of
the worlds than those that exist. Through the course of those high-souled
ones, the ocean became so saline as to be undrinkable. The fire of their
wrath yet burns in the forest of Dandaka, unquenched by time. They are
the gods of the gods, and the cause of all cause. They are the authority
of all authorities. What man of intelligence and wisdom is there that
would seek to humiliate them? Amongst them the young and the old all
deserve honours. They honour one another (not in consequence of
distinctions of age but) in consequence of distinctions in respect of
penances and knowledge. Even the Brahmana that is destitute of knowledge
is a god and is a high instrument for cleansing others. He amongst them,
then, that is possessed of knowledge is a much higher god and like unto
the ocean when full (to the brim). Learned or unlearned, Brahmana is
always a high deity. Sanctified or unsanctified (with the aid of
Mantras), Fire is ever a great deity. A blazing fire even when it burns
on a crematorium, is not regarded as tainted in consequence of the
character of the spot whereon it burns. Clarified butter looks beautiful
whether kept on the sacrificial altar or in a chamber. So, if a Brahmana
be always engaged in evil acts, he is still to be regarded as deserving
of honour. Indeed, know that the Brahmana is always a high deity.'"



SECTION CLII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell us, O king, what is that reward attached to the
worship of Brahmanas, seeing which thou worshippest them, O thou of
superior intelligence! Indeed, what is that success, flowing from their
worship, guided by which thou worshippest them?'

"Bhishma said, 'In this connection is cited this old narrative of a
conversation between Pavana and Arjuna, O Bharata! Endued with a thousand
arms and great beauty the mighty Kartavirya, in days of yore, became the
lord of all the world. He had his capital in the city of Mahishmati. Of
unbaffled prowess, that chief of the Haihaya race of Kshatriyas swayed
the whole earth with her belt of seas, together with all her islands and
all her precious mines of gold and gems. Keeping before him the duties of
the Kshatriya order, as also humility and Vedic knowledge, the king made
large gifts of wealth unto the Rishi Dattatreya. Indeed, the son of
Kritavirya thus adored the great ascetic who, becoming pleased with him,
asked him to solicit three boons. Thus requested by the Rishi in respect
of boons, the king addressed him, saying, 'Let me become endued with a
thousand arms when I am in the midst of my troops. While, however, I
remain at home let me have, as usual only two arms! Indeed, let
combatants, when engaged in battle, behold me possessed of a thousand
arms, observant also of high vows, let me succeed in subjugating the
whole earth by dint of my prowess. Having acquired the earth righteously,
let me sway her with vigilance. There is a fourth boon which, O foremost
of regenerate persons, I solicit thee to grant. O faultless one, in
consequence of the disposition to favour me, it behoveth thee to grant it
to me. Dependent that I am on thee, whenever I may happen to go wrong,
let the righteous come forth to instruct and set me right! Thus
addressed, the Brahmana replied unto the king, saying, 'So let it be!'
Even thus were those boons acquired by that king of blazing effulgence.
Riding then on his car whose splendour resembled that of fire or the Sun,
the monarch, blinded by his great prowess, said, 'Who, indeed, is there
that can be regarded as my equal in patience and energy, in fame and
heroism, in prowess and strength?' After he had uttered these words, an
invisible voice in the welkin said, 'O ignorant wretch, dost thou not
know that the Brahmana is superior to the Kshatriya? The Kshatriya,
assisted by the Brahmana rules all creatures!'

"Arjuna said, 'When gratified, I am able to create many creatures. When
angry, I am able to destroy all. In thought, word, and deed, I am the
foremost. The Brahmana is certainly not above me!' The first proposition
here is that the Brahmana is superior to the Kshatriya. The
counter-proposition is that the Kshatriya is superior. Thou hast said, O
invisible being that the two are united together (in the act upon which
the Kshatriya's superiority is sought to be based). A distinction,
however, is observable in this. It is seen that Brahmanas take refuge
with Kshatriyas. The Kshatriyas never seek the refuge of Brahmanas.
indeed, throughout the earth, the Brahmanas, accepting such refuge under
the pretence of teaching the Vedas, draw their sustenance from the
Kshatriyas. The duty of protecting all creatures is vested in Kshatriyas.
It is from the Kshatriyas that the Brahmanas derive their sustenance. How
then can the Brahmana be superior to the Kshatriyas? Well, I shall from
today, bring under my subjection, your Brahmanas who are superior to all
creatures but who have mendicancy for their occupation and who are so
self-conceited! What the virgin Gayatri has said from the welkin is not
true. Robed in skins, the Brahmanas move about in independence. I shall
bring those independent wights under my subjection. Deity or man, there
is none in the three worlds who can hurl me from the sovereignty I enjoy.
Hence, I am certainly superior to the Brahmanas. This world that is now
regarded as having Brahmanas for its foremost denizens shall soon be made
such as to have Kshatriyas for its foremost denizens. There is none that
is capable of bearing my might in battle! Hearing these words of Arjuna,
the welkin-ranging goddess became agitated. Then the god of wind,
addressing the king from the sky, said, 'Cast off this sinful attitude.
Bow unto the Brahmanas. By injuring them thou wilt bring about troubles
on thy kingdom. The Brahmanas will either slay thee, king though thou
art, or, endued with great might that they are, they will drive thee away
from thy kingdom, despoiling thee of thy energy!' The king, hearing this
speech, addressed the speaker, saying, Who, indeed, art thou?' The god of
wind answered, 'I am the god of wind and the messenger of the deities! I
say unto thee what is for thy benefit.'

"Arjuna said, 'Oh, I see that thou hast today shown thy devotion and
attachment to the Brahmanas. Tell me now what kind of earthly creature is
the Brahmana! Tell me, does a superior Brahmana resemble the Wind in any
respect? Or, is he like Water, or Fire, or the Sun, or the Firmament?'"



SECTION CLIII

"The god of wind said, 'Hear, O deluded man, what the attributes are that
belong to Brahmanas all of whom are endued with high souls. The Brahmana
is superior to all those which, O king, thou hast named! In days of yore,
the earth, indulging in a spirit of rivalry with the kind of the Angas,
forsook her character as Earth. The regenerate Kasyapa caused destruction
to overtake her by actually paralysing her. The Brahmanas are always
unconquerable, O king, in heaven as also on earth. In days of yore, the
great Rishi Angiras, through his energy, drank off all the waters. The
high-souled Rishi, having drank off all the waters as if they were milk,
did not feel yet his thirst to be slaked. He, therefore, once more caused
the earth to be filled with water by raising a mighty wave. On another
occasion, when Angiras became enraged with me, I fled away, leaving the
world, and dwelt for a long time concealed in the Agnihotra of the
Brahmanas through fear of that Rishi. The illustrious Purandara, in
consequence of his having coveted the body of Ahalya, was cursed by
Gautama, yet, for the sake of Righteousness and wealth, the Rishi did not
destroy outright the chief of the deities. The Ocean, O king, that was
full in former days of crystal water, cursed by the Brahmanas, became
saline in taste.[608] Even Agni who is of the complexion of gold, and who
blazes with effulgence when destitute of smoke, and whose flames uniting
together burn upwards, when cursed by the angry Angiras, became divested
of all these attributes.[609] Behold, the sixty thousand sons of Sagara,
who came here to adore the Ocean, have all been pulverised by the
Brahmana. Kapila of golden complexion. Thou art not equal to the
Brahmanas. Do thou, O king, seek thy own good. The Kshatriya of even
great puissance bows to Brahmana children that are still in their
mothers' wombs. The large kingdom of the Dandakas was destroyed by a
Brahmana. The mighty Kshatriya Talajangala was destroyed by a single
Brahmana. viz., Aurva. Thou too hast acquired a large kingdom, great
might, religious merit, and learning, which are all difficult of
attainment, through the grace of Dattatreya. Why dost thou, O Arjuna,
worship Agni everyday who is a Brahmana? He is the bearer of sacrificial
libations from every part of the universe. Art thou ignorant of this
fact? Why, indeed, dost thou suffer thyself to be stupefied by folly when
thou art not ignorant of the fact that a superior Brahmana is the
protector of all creatures in the world and is, indeed, the creator of
the living world? The Lord of all creatures, Brahman, unmanifest, endued
with puissance, and of unfading glory, who created this boundless
universe with its mobile and immobile creatures (is a Brahman). Some
persons there are, destitute of wisdom, who say that Brahman was born of
an Egg. From the original Egg, when it burst forth, mountains and the
points of the compass and the waters and the earth and the heavens all
sprang forth into existence. This birth of the creation was not seen by
any one. How then can Brahman be said to have taken his birth from the
original Egg, when especially he is declared as Unborn? It is said that
vast uncreate Space is the original Egg. It was from this uncreate Space
(or Supreme Brahman) that the Grandsire was born. If thou askest,
'Whereon would the Grandsire, after his birth from uncreate Space, rest,
for there was then nothing else?' The answer may be given in the
following words, 'There is an existent Being of the name of
Consciousness. That mighty Being is endued with great energy. There is no
Egg. Brahman, however, is existent. He is the creator of the universe and
is its king! Thus addressed by the god of wind, king Arjuna remained
silent.'"[610]



SECTION CLIV

"The god of wind said, 'Once on a time, O king, a ruler of the name of
Anga desired to give away the whole earth as sacrificial present unto the
Brahmanas. At this, the earth became filled with anxiety. 'I am the
daughter of Brahman. I hold all creatures. Having obtained me, alas, why
does this foremost of kings wish to give me away unto the Brahmanas?
Abandoning my character as the soil, I shall now repair to the presence
of my sire. Let this king with all his kingdom meet with destruction?
Arrived at this conclusion, she departed for the region of Brahman The
Rishi Kasyapa, beholding goddess Earth on the point of departing, himself
immediately entered the visible embodiment of the goddess, casting off
his own body, by the aid of Yoga. The earth thus penetrated by the spirit
of Kasyapa, grew in prosperity and became full of all kinds of vegetable
produce. Indeed, O king for the time that Kasyapa pervaded the earth,
Righteousness became foremost everywhere and all fears ceased. In this
way, O king, the earth remained penetrated by the spirit of Kasyapa for
thirty thousand celestial years, fully alive to all those functions which
it used to discharge while it was penetrated by the spirit of Brahman's
daughter. Upon the expiry of this period, the goddess returned from the
region of Brahman and arrived here bowed unto Kasyapa and from that time
became the daughter of that Rishi, Kasyapa is a Brahmana. Even this was
the feat, O king, that a Brahmana did. Tell me the name of the Kshatriya
who can be held to be superior to Kasyapa! Hearing these words, king
Arjuna remained silent. Unto him the god of wind once more said, 'Hear
now, O king, the story of Utathya who was born in the race of Angiras.
The daughter of Soma, named Bhadra, came to be regarded as unrivalled in
beauty. Her sire Soma regarded Utathya to be the fittest of husbands for
her. The famous and highly blessed maiden of faultless limbs, observing
diverse vows, underwent the severest austerities from the desire of
obtaining Utathya for her lord. After a while, Soma's father Atri,
inviting Utathya to his house, bestowed upon him the famous maiden.
Utathya, who used to give away sacrificial presents in copious measure,
duly received the girl for his wife. It so happened, however, that the
handsome Varuna had, from a long time before, coveted the girl. Coming to
the woods where Utathya dwelt, Varuna stole away the girl when she had
plunged into the Yamuna for a bath. Abducting her thus, the Lord of the
waters took her to his own abode. That mansion was of a wonderful aspect.
It was adorned with six hundred thousand lakes. There is no mansion that
can be regarded more beautiful than that palace of Varuna. It was adorned
with many palaces and by the presence of diverse tribes of Apsaras and of
diverse excellent articles of enjoyment. There, within that palace, the
Lord of waters; O king, sported with the damsel. A little while after,
the fact of the ravishment of his wife was reported to Utathya. Indeed,
having heard all the facts from Narada, Utathya addressed' the celestial
Rishi, saying, 'Go, O Narada, unto Varuna and speak with due severity
unto him. Ask him as to why he has abducted my wife, and, indeed, tell
him in my name that he should yield her up. Thou mayst say to him
further, 'Thou are a protector of the worlds, O Varuna, and not a
destroyer! Why then hast thou abducted Utathya's wife bestowed upon him
by Soma?' Thus requested by Utathya, the celestial Rishi Narada repaired
to where Varuna was and addressing him, said, 'Do thou set free the wife
of Utathya. Indeed, why hast thou abducted her?' Hearing these words of
Narada, Varuna replied unto him, saying, 'This timid girl is exceedingly
dear to me. I dare not let her go!' Receiving this reply, Narada repaired
to Utathya and cheerlessly said, 'O great ascetic, Varuna has driven me
out from his house, seizing me by the throat. He is unwilling to restore
to thee thy spouse. Do thou act as thou pleasest.' Hearing these words of
Narada, Angiras became inflamed with wrath. Endued with wealth of
penances, he solidified the waters and drank them off, aided by his
energy. When all the waters were thus drunk off, the Lord of that element
became very cheerless with all his friends and kinsfolk. For all that, he
did not still give up Utathya's wife. Then Utathya, that foremost of
regenerate persons, filled with wrath, commanded Earth, saying, 'O
amiable one, do thou show land where there are at present the six hundred
thousand lakes.' At these words of the Rishi, the Ocean receded from the
spot indicated, and land appeared which was exceedingly sterile. Unto the
rivers that flowed through that region, Utathya said, 'O Saraswati, do
thou become invisible here. Indeed, O timid lady, leaving this region, go
thou to the desert! O auspicious goddess, let this region, destitute of
thee, cease to become sacred.' When that region (in which the lord of
waters dwelt) became dry, he repaired to Angiras, taking with him
Utathya's spouse, and made her over to him. Getting back his wife,
Utathya became cheerful. Then, O chief of the Haihaya race, that great
Brahmana rescued both the universe and the Lord of waters from the
situation of distress into which he had brought them. Conversant with
every duty, the Rishi Utathya of great energy, after getting back his
spouse, O king, said so unto Varuna, 'I have recovered my wife, O Lord of
waters, with the aid of my penances and after inflicting such distress on
thee as made thee cry aloud in anguish! Having said this, he went home,
with that wife of his. Even such, O king, was Utathya, that foremost of
Brahmanas. Shall I go on? Or, will you yet persist in thy opinion? What,
is there a Kshatriya that is superior to Utathya?'



SECTION CLV

"Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, king Arjuna remained silent. The god of
wind once more spoke to him, 'Listen now, O king, to the story of the
greatness of the Brahmana Agastya. Once on a time, the gods were
subjugated by the Asuras upon which they became very cheerless. The
sacrifices of the deities were all seized, and the Swadha of the Pitris
was also misappropriated. Indeed, O Chief of the Haihayas, all the
religious acts and observances of human beings also were suspended by the
Danavas. Divested of their prosperity, the deities wandered over the
earth as we have heard. One day, in course of their wandering they met
Agastya of high vows, that Brahmana, O king, who was endued with great
energy and splendour which was as blazing as that of the sun. Saluting
him duly, the deities made the usual enquiries of politeness. They then,
O King, said these words unto that high-souled one, 'We have been
defeated by the Danavas in battle and have, therefore, fallen off from
affluence and prosperity. Do thou, therefore, O foremost of ascetics,
rescue us from this situation of great fear.' Thus informed of the plight
to which the deities had been reduced, Agastya became highly incensed
(with the Danavas). Possessed of great energy, he at once blazed forth
like the all-consuming fire at the time of the universal dissolution.
With the blazing rays that then emanated from the Rishi, the Danavas
began to be burnt. Indeed, O king, thousands of them began to drop down
from the sky. Burning with the energy of Agastya, the Danavas, abandoning
both heaven and earth, fled towards the southern direction. At that time
the Danava king Vali was performing a Horse-sacrifice in the nether
regions. Those great Asuras who were with him in those regions or who
were dwelling in the bowels of the earth, were not burnt. The deities,
upon the destruction of their foes, then regained their own regions,
their fears entirely dispelled. Encouraged by what he accomplished for
them, they then solicited the Rishi to destroy those Asuras who had taken
refuge within the bowels of the earth or in the nether regions. Thus
solicited by the gods, Agastya replied unto them, saying, 'Yes, I am
fully competent to consume those Asuras that are dwelling underneath the
earth; but if I achieve such a feat, my penances will suffer a
diminution. Hence, I shall not exert my power.' Even thus, O king, were
the Danavas consumed by the illustrious Rishi with his own energy. Even
thus did Agastya of cleansed soul, O monarch, accomplish that feat with
the aid of his penances. O sinless one, even so was Agastya as described
by me! Shall I continue? Or, will you say anything in reply? Is there any
Kshatriya who is greater than Agastya?'

"Bhishma continued, 'Thus addressed, king Arjuna remained silent. The god
of wind once more said, 'Hear, O king, one of the great feats of the
illustrious Vasishtha. Once on a time the deities were engaged in
performing a sacrifice on the shores of the lake Vaikhanasa. Knowing of
his puissance, the sacrificing gods thought of Vasishtha and made him
their priest in imagination. Meanwhile, seeing the gods reduced and
emaciated in consequence of the Diksha they were undergoing, a race of
Danavas, of the name of Khalins, of statures as gigantic as mountains,
desired to slay them. Those amongst the Danavas that were either disabled
or slain in the fight were plunged into the waters of the Manasa lake and
in consequence of the boon of the Grandsire they instantly came back to
vigour and life. Taking up huge and terrible mountain summits and maces
and trees, they agitated the waters of the lake, causing them to swell up
to the height of a hundred yojanas. They then ran against the deities
numbering ten thousand. Afflicted by the Danavas, the gods then sought
the protection of their chief, Vasava-Sakra, however, was soon afflicted
by them. In his distress he sought the protection of Vasishtha. At this,
the holy Rishi Vasishtha assured the deities, dispelling their fears.
Understanding that the gods had become exceedingly cheerless, the ascetic
did this through compassion. He put forth his energy and burnt, without
any exertion, those Danavas called Khalins. Possessed of wealth of
penances, the Rishi brought the River Ganga, who had gone to Kailasa, to
that spot. Indeed, Ganga appeared, piercing through the waters of the
lake. The lake was penetrated by that river. And as that celestial
stream, piercing through the waters of the lake, appeared, it flowed on,
under the name of Sarayu. The place whereon those Danavas fell came to be
called after them. Even thus were the denizens of Heaven, with Indra at
their head, rescued from great distress by Vasishtha, It was thus that
those Danavas, who had received boons from Brahman, were slain by that
high-souled Rishi. O sinless one, I have narrated to thee the feat which
Vasishtha accomplished. Shall I go on? Or, will you say anything! Was
there a Kshatriya who could be said to surpass the Brahmana Vasishtha?'



SECTION CLVI

"Bhishma said, 'Thus addressed, Arjuna remained silent. The god of wind
once more addressed him, saying, 'Hear me, O foremost one of the
Haihayas, as I narrate to thee the achievement of the high-souled Atri.
Once on a time as the gods and Danavas were fighting each other in the
dark, Rahu pierced both Surya and Soma with his arrows. The gods,
overwhelmed by darkness, began to fall before the mighty Danavas, O
foremost of kings! Repeatedly struck by the Asuras, the denizens of
heaven began to lose their strength. They then beheld the learned
Brahmana Atri, endued with wealth of penances, engaged in the observance
of austerities. Addressing that Rishi who had conquered all his senses
and in whom wrath had been extinguished, they said 'Behold, O Rishi,
these two, viz., Soma and Surya, who have both been pierced by the Asuras
with their arrows! In consequence of this, darkness has overtaken us, and
we are being struck down by the foe. We do not see the end of our
troubles! Do thou, O lord of great puissance, rescue us from this great
fear.'

"The Rishi said, 'How, indeed, shall I protect you? They answered,
saying, 'Do thou thyself become Chandramas. Do thou also become the sun,
and do thou begin to slay these robbers!' Thus solicited by them, Atri
assumed the form of the darkness-destroying Soma. Indeed, in consequence
of his agreeable disposition, he began to look as handsome and delightful
as Soma himself. Beholding that the real Soma and the real Surya had
become darkened by the shafts of the foe, Atri, assuming the forms of
those luminaries, began to shine forth in splendour over the field of
battle, aided by the puissance of his penances. Verily Atri made the
universe blaze forth in light, dispelling all its darkness. By putting
forth his puissance, he also subjugated the vast multitudes of those
enemies of the deities. Beholding those great Asuras burnt by Atri, the
gods also, protected by Atri's energy, began to despatch them quickly.
Putting forth his prowess and mastering all his energy, it was even in
this way that Atri illumined the god of day, rescued the deities, and
slew the Asuras! Even this was the feat that regenerate one, aided by his
sacred fire,--that silent reciter of Mantras, that one clad in
deer-skins,--accomplished! Behold, O royal sage, that act achieved by
that Rishi who subsisted upon fruits only! I have thus narrated to thee,
in detail, the feat of the high-souled Atri. Shall I go on! Or, will you
say anything? Is there a Kshatriya that is superior to this regenerate
Rishi?'

"Thus addressed, Arjuna remained silent. The god of wind once more spake
unto him, 'Hear, O king, the feat achieved by the high-souled Chyavana
(in days of old). Having passed his promise to the twin Aswins, Chyavana
addressed the chastiser of Paka, saying, 'Do thou make the Aswins
drinkers of Soma with all other deities!'

"Indra said, 'The Aswins have been cast away by us. How then, can they be
admitted into the sacrificial circle for drinking Soma with the others?
They are not numbered with the deities. Do not, therefore, tell us so! O
thou of great vows, we do not wish to drink Soma in the company of the As
wins. Whatever other behest thou mayst be pleased to utter, O learned
Brahmana, we are ready to accomplish.'

"Chyavana said, 'The twin Aswins shall drink Soma with all of you! Both
of them are gods, O chief of the deities, for they are the sons of Surya.
Let the gods do what I have said. By acting according to those words, the
gods will reap great advantage. By acting otherwise, evil will overtake
them.'

"Indra said, 'I shall not, O foremost of regenerate persons, drink Soma
with the Aswins! Let others drink with them as they please! As regards
myself, I dare not do it.'

"Chyavana said, 'If, O slayer of Vala, thou wilt not obey my words, thou
shalt, this very day, drink Soma with them in sacrifice, compelled by me!

"The god of wind said, 'Then Chyavana, taking the Aswins with him,
commenced a great religious rite for their benefit. The gods all became
stupefied by Chyavana with his Mantras. Beholding that feat commenced by
Chyavana, Indra became incensed with wrath. Taking up a huge mountain he
ran against that Rishi. The chief of the deities was also armed with the
thunderbolt. Then the illustrious Chyavana, endued with penances, cast an
angry glance upon Indra as he advanced. Throwing a little water at him,
he paralysed the chief of the deities with his thunderbolt and mountain.
As the result of the religious rite he had commenced, he created a
terrible Asura hostile to Indra. Made of the libations he had poured on
the sacred fire, that Asura was called Mada, of mouth gaping wide. Even
such was the Asura that the great ascetic created with the aid of
Mantras. There were a thousand teeth in his mouth, extending for a
hundred yojanas. Of terrible mien, his fangs were two hundred yojanas in
length. One of his cheeks rested on the earth and the other touched the
heavens. Indeed, all the gods with Vasava seemed to stand at the root of
that great Asura's tongue, even as fishes when they enter into the wide
open mouth of a leviathan. While standing within the mouth of Mada, the
gods held a quick consultation and then addressing Indra, said, 'Do thou
soon bend thy head in reverence unto this regenerate personage! Freed
from every scruple, we shall drink Soma with the Aswins in our company!
Then Sakra, bowing down his head unto Chyavana, obeyed his behest. Even
thus did Chyavana make the Aswins drinkers of Soma with the other gods.
Calling back Mada, the Rishi then assigned him the acts he was to do.
That Mada was commanded to take up his residence in dice, in hunting, in
drinking, and in women. Hence, O king, those men that betake themselves
to these, meet with destruction, without doubt. Hence, one should always
cast off these faults to a great distance. Thus, O king, I have narrated
to thee the feat achieved by Chyavana. Shall I go on? Or, will you say
anything in reply? Is there a Kshatriya that is higher than the Brahmana
Chyavana?'"



SECTION CLVII

"Bhishma said, 'Hearing these words of the god of wind, Arjuna remained
silent. At this, the god of wind once more addressed him, saying, 'When
the denizens of heaven, with Indra at their head, found themselves within
the mouth of the Asura Mada, at that time Chyavana took away from them
the earth. Deprived previously of heaven and now shorn of the earth also,
the gods became very cheerless. Indeed, those high-souled ones, afflicted
with grief, then threw themselves unreservedly upon the Grandsire's
protection.'

"The gods said, 'O thou that art adored by all creatures of the universe,
the earth has been taken away from us by Chyavana, while we have been
deprived of heaven by the Kapas, O puissant one!'

"Brahmana said, 'Ye denizens of heaven, do you, with Indra at your head,
repair quickly and seek the protection of the Brahmanas. By gratifying
them you will succeed in regaining both the regions as before.' Thus
instructed by the Grandsire, the deities repaired to the Brahmanas and
became suppliants for their protection. The Brahmanas replied, enquiring,
'Whom shall we subjugate?' Thus asked, the deities said unto them, 'Do ye
subjugate the Kapas.' The Brahmanas then said, 'Bringing them down on the
earth first, we shall speedily subjugate them.' After this, the Brahmanas
commenced a rite having for its object the destruction of the Kapas. As
soon as this was heard of by the Kapas, they immediately despatched a
messenger of theirs, named Dhanin, unto those Brahmanas. Dhanin, coming
to them as they sat on the earth, thus delivered to them the message of
the Kapas. The Kapas are even like you all! (They are not inferior to any
of you). Hence, what will be the effect of these rites which you seem to
be bent upon achieving? All of them are well-conversant with the Vedas
and possessed of wisdom. All of them are mindful of sacrifices. All of
them have Truth for their vow, and for these reasons all of them are
regarded as equal to great Rishis. The goddess of Prosperity sports among
them, and they, in their turn, support her with reverence. They never
indulge in acts of fruitless congress with their wives, and they never
eat the flesh of such animals as have not been killed in sacrifices. They
pour libations on the blazing sacrificial fire (every day) and 'are
obedient to the behests of their preceptors and seniors. All of them are
of souls under perfect control, and never take any food without dividing
it duly among their children. They always proceed on cars and other
vehicles together (without any of them riding his own vehicle while
others journey on foot). They never indulge in acts of congress with
their spouses when the latter are in midst of their functional period.
They all act in such a way as to attain to regions of felicity hereafter.
Indeed, they are always righteous in their deeds. When women quick with
child or old men have not eaten, they never eat anything themselves. They
never indulge in play or sports of any kind in the forenoon. They never
sleep during the day. When the Kapas have these and many other virtues
and accomplishments, why, indeed, would you seek to subjugate them? You
should abstain from the endeavour! Verily, by such abstention ye would
achieve what is for your good.'

"The Brahmanas said, 'Oh, we shall subjugate the Kapas! In this matter,
we art one with the deities. Hence, the Kapas deserve slaughter at your
hands. As regards Dhanin, he should return whence he came! After this,
Dhanin, returning to the Kapas, said unto them, 'The Brahmanas are not
disposed to do you any good! 'Hearing this, all the Kapas took up their
weapons and proceeded towards the Brahmanas. The Brahmanas, beholding the
Kapas advancing against them with the standards of their cars upraised,
forthwith created certain blazing fires for the destruction of the Kapas.
Those eternal fires, created with the aid of Vedic Mantras, having
effected the destruction of the Kapas, began to shine in the firmament
like so many (golden) clouds. The gods, having assembled together in
battle, slew many of the Danavas. They did not know at that time that it
was the Brahmanas who had effected their destruction. Then Narada of
great energy, coming there, O king, informed the deities how their foes;
the Kapas, had been really slain by the Brahmanas of mighty energy (and
not by deities themselves). Hearing these words of Narada, the denizens
of heaven became highly gratified. They also applauded those regenerate
allies of theirs that were possessed of great fame. The energy and
prowess of the deities then began to increase, and worshipped in all the
worlds, they acquired also the boon of immortality!' After the god of
wind had said these words, king Arjuna worshipped him duly and addressing
him answered in these words, 'Hear, O mighty armed monarch, what Arjuna
said.'

"Arjuna said, O puissant god, always and by all means do I live for the
Brahmanas! Devoted to them, I worship them always! Through the grace of
Dattatreya I have obtained this might of mine! Through his grace have I
been able to accomplish great feats in the world and achieve high merit!
Oh, I have, with attention, heard of the achievements, O god of the wind,
of the Brahmanas with all their interesting details as recited by thee
truly.'

"The god of wind said, 'Do thou protect and cherish the Brahmanas, in the
exercise of those Kshatriya duties which are thine by birth. Do thou
protect them even as thou protectest thy own senses! There is danger to
thee from the race of Bhrigu! All that, however, will take place on a
distant day.'"



SECTION CLVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'Thou always worshippest, O king, Brahmanas of
praiseworthy, vows. Whatever, however is that fruit seeing which thou
worshippest them, O king? O thou of high vows, beholding what prosperity
attaching to the worship of the Brahmanas dost thou worship them? Tell me
all this, O thou of mighty arms!

"Bhishma said, 'Here is Kesava endued with great intelligence. He will
tell thee everything. Of high vows and endued with prosperity, even he
will tell you what the prosperity is that attaches to the worship of
Brahmanas. My strength, ears, speech, mind, eyes, and that clear
understanding of mine (are all clouded today). I think, the time is not
distant when I shall have to cast off my body. The sun seems to me to go
very slowly.[611] Those high duties, O king, that are mentioned in the
Puranas as observed by Brahmanas and Kshatriyas and Vaisyas and Sudras,
have all been recited by me. Do thou, O son of Pritha, learn from Krishna
what little remains to be learnt on that head. I know Krishna truly. I
know who he is and what his ancient might is. O chief of the Kauravas,
Kesava is of immeasurable soul. Whenever doubts arise, it is he who
upholds Righteousness then.[612] It is Krishna who created the earth, and
sky, and the heavens. Indeed, the earth has sprung from Krishna's body.
Of terrible prowess and existing from the beginning of time, it is
Krishna who became the mighty Boar and raised the submerged Earth. It is
He who created all the points of the compass, together with all the
mountains. Below Him are the welkin, heaven, the four cardinal points,
and the four subsidiary points. It is from him that the entire creation
has flowed. It is He who has created this ancient universe. In His navel
appeared a Lotus. Within that Lotus sprang Brahma himself of immeasurable
energy. It was Brahma, O son of Pritha, who rent that darkness which
existed surpassing the very ocean (in depth and extent). In the Treta
age, O Partha, Krishna existed (on the earth), in the form of
Righteousness. In the Treta age, he existed in the form of Knowledge. In
the Dwapara age, he existed in the form of might. In the Kali age he came
to the earth in the form of unrighteousness. It is He who in days of yore
slew the Daityas. It is He who is the Ancient God. It is He who ruled the
Asuras in the form of their Emperor (Valin). It is He who is the Creator
of all beings. It is He who is also the future of all created Beings. It
is He who is also the protector of this universe fraught with the seed of
destruction. When the cause of Righteousness languishes, this Krishna
takes birth in the race of either the gods or among men. Staying on
Righteousness, this Krishna of cleansed soul (on such occasion) protects
both the higher and the lower worlds. Sparing those that deserve to be
spared, Krishna sets himself to the slaughter of the Asura, O Partha! It
is he who is all acts proper and improper and it is he who is the cause.
It is Krishna who is the act done, the act to be done, and the act that
is being done. Know that that illustrious one is Rahu and Soma and Sakra.
It is he that is Viswakarma. It is he that is of universal form. He is
the destroyer and he is the Creator of the universe. He is the wielder of
the Sula (lance); He is of human form; and He is of terrible form. All
creatures sing his praises, for he is known by his acts. Hundreds of
Gandharvas and Apsaras and deities always accompany him. The very
Rakshasas hymn his praise. He is the Enhancer of Wealth; He is the one
victorious Being in the universe. In Sacrifices, eloquent men hymn His
praises. The singers of Samans praise Him by reciting the Rathantaras.
The Brahmanas praise Him with Vedic Mantras. It is unto Him that the
sacrificial priests pour their libations. The deities with Indra at their
head hymned His praise when He lifted up the Gobardhana mountains for
protecting the cow-herds of Brindavana against the incessant showers that
Indra poured in rage. He is, O Bharata, the one Blessing unto all
creatures. He, O Bharata, having entered the old Brahma cave, beheld from
that place the original cover of the world in the beginning of Time.[613]
Agitating all the Danavas and the Asuras, this Krishna of foremost feats
rescued the earth. It is unto Him that people dedicate diverse kinds of
food. It is unto Him that the warriors dedicate all kinds of their
vehicles at the time of war. He is eternal, and it is under that
illustrious one that the welkin, earth, heaven, all things exist and
stay. He it is who has caused the vital seed of the gods Mitra and Varuna
to fall within a jar, whence sprang the Rishi known by the name of
Vasishtha. It is Krishna who is the god of wind; it is He who is the
puissant Aswins; it is He who is that first of gods, viz., the sun
possessed of a thousand rays. It is He by whom the Asuras have been
subjugated. It is He who covered the three worlds with three steps of
His. He is the soul of the deities and human beings, and Pitris. It is He
who is the Sacrifice performed by those persons that are conversant with
the rituals of sacrifices. It is He who rises every day in the firmament
(in the form of the sun) and divides Time into day and night, and courses
for half the year northwards and for half the year southwards.
Innumerable rays of light emanate from Him upwards and downwards and
transversely and illumine the earth. Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas
adore Him. Taking a portion of His rays the sun shines in the firmament.
Month after month, the sacrificer ordains Him as a sacrifice. Regenerate
persons conversant with the Vedas sing His praises in sacrifices of all
kinds. He it is that constitutes the wheel of the year, having three
naves and seven horses to drag it. It is in this way that He supports the
triple mansion (of the seasons), Endued with great energy, pervading all
things, the foremost of all creatures, it is Krishna who alone upholds
all the worlds. He is the sun, the dispeller of all darkness. He is the
Creator of all. Do thou, O hero, approach that Krishna! Once on a time,
the high-souled and puissant Krishna dwelt, for a while, in the form of
Agni in the forest of Khandava among some straw or dry grass. Soon was He
gratified (for he consumed all the medicinal herbs in that forest).
Capable of going everywhere at will, it was Krishna who, having
subjugated the Rakshasas and Uragas, poured them as libations upon the
blazing fire. It is Krishna who gave unto Arjuna a number of white
steeds. It is He who is the creator of all steeds. This world (or, human
life) represents his car. He it is that yokes that car for setting it in
motion. That car has three wheels (viz., the three attributes of Sattwa,
Rajas, and Tamas). It has three kinds of motion (for it goes upwards or
downwards or transversely, implying superior, inferior, and intermediate
birth as brought about by acts). It has four horses yoked to it (viz.,
Time, Predestiny, the will of the deities, and one's own will). It has
three naves (white, black, and mixed, implying good acts, evil acts and
acts that are of a mixed character). It is this Krishna who is the refuge
of the five original elements with the sky among them. It is He who
created the earth and heaven and the space between. Indeed, it is this
Krishna of immeasurable and blazing energy who has created the forests
and the mountains. It is this Krishna who, desirous of chastising Sakra
who was about to hurl his thunder at him, crossed the rivers and once
paralysed him. He is the one great Indra that is adored by the Brahmanas
in great sacrifices with the aid of a thousand old Riks. It was this
Krishna, O king, who alone was able to keep the Rishi Durvasa of great
energy as a guest for some time in his house. He is said to be the one
ancient Rishi. He is the Creator of the universe. Indeed, He creates
everything from His own nature. Superior to all two deities it is He who
teaches all the deities. He scrupulously observes all ancient ordinances.
Know, O king, that this Krishna, who is called Vishwaksena, is the fruit
of all acts that relate to pleasure, of all acts that are founded on the
Vedas, and of all acts that appertain to the world. He is the white rays
of light that are seen in all the worlds. He is the three worlds. He is
the three Regents of all the worlds. He is the three sacrificial fires.
He is the three Vyahritis; indeed, this son of Devaki is all the gods
together. He is the year; He is the Seasons; He is the Fortnights; He is
the Day and the Night; He is those divisions of time which are called
Kalas, and Kashthas, and Matras, and Muhurtas, and Lavas, and Kshanas.
Know that this Vishwaksena is all these. The Moon and the Sun, the
Planets, the Constellations, and the Stars, all the Parva days, including
the day of the full moon, the conjunctions of the constellations and the
seasons, have, O son of Pritha, flowed from this Krishna who is
Vishwaksena. The Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Aswins, the Sadhyas,
the Viswedevas, the diverse Maruts, Prajapati himself, the mother of the
deities, viz., Aditi, and the seven Rishis, have all sprung from Krishna.
Transforming Himself into the Wind, He scatters the universe. Of
Universal form, He becomes Fire that burns all things. Changing Himself
into Water, He drenches and submerges all, and assuming the form of
Brahman, He creates all the diverse tribes of animate and inanimate
creatures. He is Himself the Veda, yet he learns all the Vedas. He is
Himself all the ordinances, yet He observes all the ordinances that have
been laid down in matters connected with Righteousness and the Vedas and
that force or might which rules the world. Indeed, know, O Yudhishthira,
that this Kesava is all the mobile and immobile universe. He is of the
form of the most resplendent light. Of universal form, this Krishna is
displayed in that blazing effulgence. The original cause of the soul of
all existent creatures, He at first created the waters. Afterwards He
created this universe. Know that this Krishna is Vishnu. Know that He is
the soul of the universe. Know that He is all the seasons; He is these
diverse wonderful vegetations of Nature which we see; He is the clouds
that pour rain and the lightening that flashes in the sky. He is the
elephant Airavata. In fact, He is all the immobile and mobile universe.
The abode of the universe and transcending all attributes, this Krishna
is Vasudeva. When He becomes Jiva He comes to be called Sankarshana.
Next, He transforms Himself into Pradyumna and then into Aniruddha. In
this way, the high-souled Krishna, who has Himself for His origin divides
(or displays) Himself in fourfold form. Desirous of creating this
universe which consists of the fivefold primal elements. He sets himself
to his task, and causes it to go on in the fivefold form of animate
existence consisting of deities and Asuras and human beings and beasts
and birds. He it is that then creates the Earth and the Wind, the Sky,
Light, and also Water, O son of Pritha! Having created this universe of
immobile and mobile objects distributed into four orders of being (viz.,
viviparous, oviparous, vegetable and filth-born), he then created the
earth with her fivefold seed. He then created the firmament for pouring
copious showers of water on the earth.[614] Without doubt, O king, it is
this Krishna who has created this universe. His origin is in his own
self; it is He who causes all things to exist through his own puissance.
He it is that has created the deities, the Asuras, the human beings, the
world, the Rishis, the Pitris, and all creatures. Desirous of creating,
that Lord of all creatures duly created the whole universe of life. Know
that good and evil, mobile and immobile, have all flowed from this One
who is Vishwaksena. Whatever exists, and whatever will spring into
existence, all is Kesava. This Krishna is also the death that overtakes
all creatures when their end comes. He is eternal and it is He who
upholds the cause of Righteousness. Whatever existed in the past, and
whatever we do not know, verily, all that also is this Vishwaksena.
Whatever is noble and meritorious in the universe, indeed, whatever of
good and of evil exists, all that is Kesava who is inconceivable. Hence,
it is absurd to think of anything that is superior to Kesava. Kesava is
even such. More than this, He is Narayana, the highest of the high,
immutable and unfading. He is the eternal and immutable cause of the
entire mobile and immobile universe with its beginning, middle, and end,
as also of all creatures whose birth follows their wish.'"



SECTION CLIX

"Yudhishthira said, 'Do thou tell us, O slayer of Madhu, what the
prosperity is that attaches to the worship of the Brahmanas. Thou art
well-conversant with this topic. Verily, our grandsire knows thee.'

"Vasudeva said, 'Hear, O king, with rapt attention to me, O chief of
Bharata's race, as I recite to thee what the merits of the Brahmanas are,
in accordance with truth, O foremost one of Kuru's race! Once on a time
while I was seated at Dwaravati, O delighter of the Kurus, my son
Pradyumna, enraged by certain Brahmanas, came to me and said, 'O slayer
of Madhu, what merit attaches to the worship of the Brahmanas? Whence is
their lordship derived both here and hereafter? O giver of honours, what
rewards are won by constantly Worshipping the Brahmanas? Do thou kindly
explain this clearly to me, for my mind is disturbed by doubts in respect
of this.' When these words were addressed to me by Pradyumna, I answered
him as follows, Do thou hear, O king, with close attention, what those
words were, 'O child of Rukmin, listen to me as I tell thee what the
prosperity is that one may win by worshipping the Brahmanas. When one
sets oneself to the acquisition of the well-known aggregate of three
(viz., Righteousness, Wealth, and Pleasure), or to the achievement of
Emancipation, or to that of fame and prosperity, or to the treatment and
cure of disease, or to the worship of the deities and the Pitris, one
should take care to gratify the regenerate ones. They are each a king
Soma (that sheds such agreeable light in the firmament.) They are
dispensers of happiness and misery. O child of Rukmini, whether in this
or in the next world, O son, everything agreeable has its origin in the
Brahmanas. I have no doubt in this! From the worship of the Brahmanas
flow mighty achievements and fame and strength. The denizens of all the
worlds, and the Regents of the universe, are all worshippers of
Brahmanas. How then, O son, can we disregard them, filled with the idea
that we are lords of the earth? O mighty-armed one, do not suffer thy
wrath to embrace the Brahmanas as its object. In this as also in the next
world, Brahmanas are regarded as beings. They have direct knowledge of
everything in the universe. Verily, they are capable of reducing
everything into ashes, if angry. They are capable of creating other
worlds and other Regents of worlds (than those that exist). Why then
should not persons who are possessed of energy and correct knowledge
behave with obedience and respect towards them? Formerly, in my house, O
son, dwelt the Brahmana Durvasa whose complexion was green and tawny.
Clad in rags, he had a stick made of the Vilwa tree.[615] His beard was
long and he was exceedingly emaciated. He was taller in stature than the
tallest man on earth. Wandering over all the worlds, viz., that which
belongs to human beings and those that are for the deities and other
superior beings, even this was the verse which he sang constantly among
assemblies and in public squares. 'Who is there that would cause the
Brahmana Durvasa to dwell in his house, doing the duties of hospitality
towards him? He becomes enraged with every one if he finds even the
slightest transgression? Hearing this regarding my disposition, who is
there that will give me refuge? Indeed, he that would give me shelter as
a guest should not do anything to anger me!' When I saw that no one
ventured to give him shelter in his house. I invited him and caused him
to take up his residence in my abode. On certain days he would eat the
food sufficient for the needs of thousands of persons. On certain other
days he would eat very little. On some days he would go out of my house
and would not return. He would sometimes laugh without any ostensible
reason and sometimes cry as causelessly. At that time there was nobody on
earth that was equal to him in years. One day, entering the quarters
assigned to him he burnt all the beds and coverlets and all the
well-adorned damsels that were there for serving him. Doing this, he went
out. Of highly praiseworthy vows, he met me shortly after this and
addressing me, said, 'O Krishna, I wish to eat frumenty without delay!'
Having understood his mind previously, I had set my servants to prepare
every kind of food and drink. Indeed, many excellent viands had been kept
ready. As soon as I was asked, I caused hot frumenty to be brought and
offered to the ascetic. Having eaten some, he quickly said unto me, 'Do
thou, O Krishna, take some of this frumenty and smear all thy limbs with
it!' Without any scruple I did as directed. Indeed, with the remnant of
that frumenty I smeared my body and head. The ascetic at that time saw
thy mother of sweet face standing near. Laughing the while, he smeared
her body also with that frumenty. The ascetic then caused thy mother,
whose body was smeared over with frumenty, to be yoked unto a car without
any delay. Ascending that car he set out of my house. Endued with great
intelligence, that Brahmana blazed with effulgence like fire, and struck,
in my presence, my Rukmini endued with youth, as if she were an animal
destined to drag the cars of human beings. Beholding this, I did not feel
the slightest grief born of malice or the desire to injure the Rishi.
Indeed, having yoked Rukmini to the car, he went out, desirous of
proceeding along the high road of the city. Seeing that extraordinary
sight, some Dasarhas, filled with wrath, addressed one another and began
to converse in this way, 'Who else is there on earth that would draw
breath after having yoked Rukmini to a car! Verily, let the world be
filled with Brahmanas only! Let no other orders take birth here. The
poison of a virulent snake is exceedingly keen. Keener than poison is a
Brahmana. There is no physician for a person that has been bitten or
burnt by the virulent snake of a Brahmana, 'As the irresistible Durvasa
proceeded on the car, Rukmini tottered on the road and frequently fell
down. At this the regenerate Rishi became angry and began to urge Rukmini
on by striking her with the whip. At last, filled with a towering
passion, the Brahmana leapt down from the car, and fled towards the
south, running on foot, over a pathless ground. Beholding that foremost
of Brahmanas flying along the pathless ground, we followed him, although
we were smeared with frumenty, exclaiming behind him, 'Be gratified with
us, O holy one! Endued with great energy, the Brahmana, seeing me, said,
'O mighty-armed Krishna, thou hast subdued wrath by the strength of thy
nature? O thou of excellent vows, I have not found the slightest fault in
thee! O Govinda, I have been highly gratified with thee. Do thou solicit
the fruition of such wishes as thou pleasest! Behold duly, O son, what
the puissance is of myself when I become gratified with any one. As long
as deities and human beings will continue to entertain a liking for food,
so long will every one among them cherish the same liking for thee that
they cherish for their food! As long, again, as there will be
Righteousness in the several world, so long will the fame of thy
achievements last! Indeed, thy distinction will last so long in the three
worlds! O Janardana, agreeable thou shalt be to all persons! Whatever
articles of thine have been broken or burnt or otherwise destroyed (by
me), thou shalt see restored, O Janardana, to their former state or they
will reappear even in a better form! As long, again, O thou of unfading
glory, as thou wilt wish to live, so long wilt thou have no fear of death
assailing thee through such parts of thy body as have been smeared with
the frumenty I gave thee! O son, why didst thou not smear that frumenty
on the soles of thy feet as well? By not doing it, thou have acted in a
way that is not approved by me! Even these were the words that he said,
well-pleased with me on that occasion. After he had ceased speaking, I
saw that my body became endued with great beauty and splendour. Unto
Rukmini also, the Rishi, well-pleased with her, said, 'O beautiful lady,
thou shalt be the foremost one of thy sex in fame, and great glory and
achievements will be thine. Decrepitude or disease or loss of complexion
will never be thine! Every one will see thee engaged in waiting upon
Krishna, possessed as thou already art with a fragrant odour which is
always present in thee. Thou shalt become the foremost of all spouses,
numbering sixteen thousand, O Kesava. At last, when the time comes for
thy departure from the world, thou shalt attain to the inseparable
companionship of Krishna hereafter!' Having said these words unto thy
mother, the Rishi once more addressed me and uttering following words,
left the spot. Indeed, the Rishi Durvasa, blazing like a fire, said, 'O
Kesava, let thy understanding be always disposed even thus towards the
Brahmana!' Verily after uttering these words, that Brahmana disappeared
there and then before my eyes. After his disappearance I took to the
observance of the vow of uttering certain Mantras silently without being
heard by anybody. Verily, from that day I resolved to accomplish whatever
behests I should receive from the Brahmanas. Having adopted this vow, O
son, along with thy mother, both of us, with hearts filled with joy
re-entered our palace, Entering our house I saw that everything which the
Rishi had broken or burnt had reappeared and become new. Beholding those
new articles, which had besides become more durable, I became filled with
wonder. Verily, O son of Rukmini, from that day forth I have always
worshipped the Brahmanas in my mind! Even this, O chief of Bharata's
race, is what I said on that occasion regarding the greatness of those
Brahmanas who are the foremost of their order. Do thou also, O son of
Kunti, worship the highly blessed Brahmanas every day with gifts of
wealth and kine, O puissant one! It was in this way that I acquired the
prosperity I enjoy, the prosperity that is born of the grace of
Brahmanas. Whatever, again, Bhishma has said of me, O chief of the
Bharatas, is all true!'"



SECTION CLX

"Yudhishthira said, 'It behoveth thee, O slayer of Madhu, to expound to
me that knowledge which thou hast acquired through the grace of Durvasa!
O foremost of all persons endued with intelligence, I desire to know
everything about the high blessedness and all the names of that
high-souled one truly and in detail![616]

"Vasudeva said, 'I shall recite to thee the good that I have acquired and
the fame that I have won through the grace of that high-souled one.
Verily, I shall discourse to thee on the topic, after having bowed unto
Kapardin. O king, listen to me as I recite to thee that Sata-rudriya
which I repeat; with restrained senses, every morning after rising from
bed. The great lord of all creatures, viz., the Grandsire Brahman
himself, endued with wealth of penances, composed those Mantras, after
having observed especial penances for some time. O sire it is Sankara who
created all the creatures in the universe, mobile and immobile. There is
no being that is higher, O monarch, than Mahadeva. Verily, he is the
highest of all beings in the three worlds. There is no one who is capable
of standing before that high-souled Being. Indeed, there is no Being in
the three worlds that can be regarded as his equal. When he stands,
filled with rage, on the field of battle, the very odour of his body
deprives all foes of consciousness and they that are not slain tremble
and fall down. His roars are terrible, resembling those of the clouds.
Hearing those roars in battle, the very hearts of the deities break in
twain. When the wielder of Pinaka becomes angry and assuming a terrible
form merely casts his eye upon deity, Asura, Gandharva, or snake, that
individual fails to obtain peace of mind by taking shelter in the
recesses of even a mountain-cave. When that lord of all creatures, viz.,
Daksha, desirous of performing a sacrifice, spread his sacrifice out, the
dauntless Bhava, giving way to wrath (at Daksha's slight of him), pierced
(the embodied) sacrifice, shooting his shaft from his terrible bow, he
roared aloud. Indeed, when Maheswara became angry and suddenly pierced
with his shaft the embodied form of sacrifice, the deities become filled
with grief, losing happiness and tranquillity of heart. In consequence of
the twang of his bow-string the whole universe became agitated. The
deities and the Asuras, O son of Pritha, all became cheerless and
stupefied. The ocean rolled in agitation and the earth trembled to her
centre. The hills and mountains began to move from their bases and ran on
every side. The vault of the welkin became cracked. All the worlds became
enveloped in gloom. Nothing could be seen. The light of all the
luminaries became darkened, along with that of the sun himself, O
Bharata! The great Rishis, penetrated with fear and desirous of doing
good to themselves and the universe, performed the usual rites of
propitiation and peace. Meanwhile, Rudra of terrible prowess rushed
against the deities. Filled with rage, he tore out the eyes of Bhaga.
Incensed with wrath, he assailed Pushan with his foot. He tore out the
teeth of that god as he sat employed in eating the large sacrificial ball
(called Purodasa). Trembling with fear, the deities bent their heads to
Sankara. Without being appeased, Rudra once more placed on his bow-string
a sharp and blazing arrow. Beholding his prowess, the deities and the
Rishis became all alarmed. Those foremost of gods began to pacify him!
Joining their hands in reverence, they began to recite the Sata-rudriya
Mantras. At last Maheswara, thus praised by the deities, became
gratified. The deities than assigned a large share (of the sacrificial
offerings) to him. Trembling with fear, O king, they sought his
protection. When Rudra became gratified, the embodiment of sacrifice,
which had been pierced in twain, became once more united. Whatever limbs
of his had been destroyed by the shafts of Mahadeva, became once more
whole and sound. The Asuras possessed of great energy had in days of yore
three cities in the firmament. One of these had been made of iron, one of
silver, and the third of gold. With all his weapons, Maghavat, the chief
of the deities, was unable to pierce those cities. Afflicted by the
Asuras, all the deities then sought the protection of the great Rudra.
Assembled together the high-souled deities addressed him, saying, 'O
Rudra, the Asuras threaten to exert their destructive influence in all
acts! Do thou slay the Daityas and destroy their city for the protection
of the three worlds, O giver of honours!' Thus addressed by them, he
replied, saying, 'So be it!' and then made Vishnu his excellent
shaft-head. He made the deity of fire his shaft-reed, and Surya's son
Yama the wings of that shaft. He made the Vedas his bow and the goddess
Savitri his excellent bow-string. And he made the Grandsire Brahma his
charioteer. Applying all these, he pierced the triple city of the Asuras
with that shaft of his, consisting of three Parvans and three
Salyas.[617] Indeed, O Bharata, the Asuras with their cities, were all
burnt by Rudra with that shaft of his whose complexion was like that of
the sun and whose energy resembled that of the fire which appears at the
end of the Yuga for consuming all things. Beholding that Mahadeva changed
into a child with five locks of hair lying on the lap of Parvati, the
latter asked the deities as to who he was. Seeing the child, Sakra became
suddenly filled with jealousy and wrath and resolved to kill him with his
thunder. The child, however, paralysed the arm, looking like a mace of
iron, of Indra with the thunderbolt in it. The deities all became
stupefied, and they could not understand that the child was the Lord of
universe. Verily, all of them along with the very Regents of the world,
found their intellects stupefied in the matter of that child who was none
else than the Supreme Being. Then the illustrious Grandsire Brahma,
reflecting with the aid of his penances, found out that that child was
the foremost of all Beings, the lord of Uma, Mahadeva of immeasurable
prowess. He then praised the Lord. The deities also began to hymn the
praises of both Uma and Rudra. The arm (which had been paralysed) of the
slayer of Vala then became restored to its former state. The Mahadeva,
taking birth as the Brahmana Durvasa of great energy, resided for a long
time at Dwaravati in my house. While residing in my abode he did diverse
acts of mischief. Though difficult of being borne, I bore them yet from
magnanimity of heart. He is Rudra; he is Shiva; he is Agni; he is Sarva;
he is the vanquisher of all; he is Indra, and Vayu, and the Aswins and
the god of lightning. He is Chandramas; he is Isana; he is Surya; he is
Varuna; he is Time; he is the Destroyer; he is Death; he is the Day and
the Night; he is the fortnight; he is the seasons; he is the two
twilights; he is the year. He is Dhatri and he is Vidhatri; and he is
Viswakarma; and he is conversant with all things. He is the cardinal
points of the compass and the subsidiary points also. Of universal form,
he is of immeasurable soul. The holy and illustrious Durvasa is of the
complexion of the celestials. He sometimes manifests himself singly;
sometimes divides himself into two portions; and sometimes exhibits
himself in many, a hundred thousand forms. Even such is Mahadeva. He is,
again, that god who is unborn. In even a hundred years one cannot exhaust
his merits by reciting them.'"



SECTION CLXI

"Vasudeva said, 'O mighty-armed Yudhishthira, listen to me as I recite to
thee the many names of Rudra as also the high blessedness of that
high-souled one. The Rishis describe Mahadeva as Agni, and Sthanu, and
Maheswara; as one-eyed, and three-eyed, of universal form, and Siva or
highly auspicious. Brahmanas conversant with the Vedas say that that god
has two forms. One of these is terrible, and the other mild and
auspicious. Those two forms, again, are subdivided into many forms. That
form which is fierce and terrible is regarded as identical with Agni and
Lightning and Surya. The other form which is mild and auspicious is
identical with Righteousness and water and Chandramas. Then, again, it is
said that half his body is fire and half is Soma (or the moon). That form
of his which is mild and auspicious is said to be engaged in the practice
of the Brahmacharya vow. The other form of his which is supremely
terrible is engaged in all operations of destruction in the universe.
Because he is great (Mahat) and the Supreme Lord of all (Iswara),
therefore he is called Maheswara. And since he burns and oppresses, is
keen and fierce, and endued with great energy, and is engaged in eating
flesh and blood and marrow, he is said to be Rudra. Since he is the
foremost of all the deities, and since his dominion and acquisitions are
very extensive, and since he protects the extensive universe, therefore
he is called Mahadeva. Since he is of the form or colour of smoke,
therefore he is called Dhurjati. Since by all his acts he performs
sacrifices for all and seeks the good of every creature, therefore he is
called Siva or the auspicious one. Staying above (in the sky) he burns
the lives of all creatures and is, besides, fixed in a particular route
from which he does not deviate. His emblem, again, is fixed and immovable
for all time. He is, for these reasons, called Sthanu. He is also of
multiform aspect. He is present, past, and future. He is mobile and
immobile. For this he is called Vahurupa (of multiform aspect). The
deities called Viswedevas reside in his body. He is, for this, called
Viswarupa (of universal form). He is thousand-eyed; or, he is
myriad-eyed; or, he has eyes on all sides and on every part of his body,
His energy issues through his eyes. There is no end of his eyes. Since he
always nourishes all creatures and sports also with them, and since he is
their lord or master, therefore he is called Pasupati (the lord of all
creatures). Since his emblem is always observant of the vow of
Brahmacharya, all the worlds worship it accordingly. This act of worship
is said to gratify him highly. If there is one who worship him by
creating his image, another who worships his emblem, the latter it is
that attains to great prosperity for ever. The Rishis, the deities, the
Gandharvas, and the Apsaras, worship that emblem of his which is ever
erect and upraised. If his emblem is worshipped, Maheswara becomes highly
gratified with the worshipper. Affectionate towards his devotees, he
bestows happiness upon them with a cheerful soul. This great god loves to
reside in crematoria and there he burns and consumes all corpses. Those
persons that perform sacrifices on such grounds attain at the end to
those regions which have been set apart for heroes. Employed in his
legitimate function, he it is That is regarded as the Death that resides
in the bodies of all creatures. He is, again, those breaths called Prana
and Apana in the bodies of all embodied beings. He has many blazing and
terrible forms. All those forms are worshipped in the world and are known
to Brahmanas possessed of knowledge. Amongst the gods he has many names
all of which are fraught with grave import. Verily, the meanings of those
names are derived from either his greatness or vastness, or his feats, or
his conduct. The Brahmanas always recite the excellent Sata-rudriya in
his honour, that occurs in the Vedas as also that which has been composed
by Vyasa. Verily, the Brahmanas and Rishis call him the eldest of all
beings. He is the first of all the deities, and it was from his mouth
that he created Agni. That righteous-souled deity, ever willing to grant
protection to all, never gives up his suppliants. He would much rather
abandon his own life-breaths and incur all possible afflictions himself.
Long life, health and freedom from disease, affluence, wealth, diverse
kinds of pleasures and enjoyments, are conferred by him, and it is he
also who snatches them away. The lordship and affluence that one sees in
Sakra and the other deities are, verily his. It is he who is always
engaged in all that is good and evil in the three worlds. In consequence
of his fullest control over all objects of enjoyment he is called Iswara
(the Supreme Lord or Master). Since, again, he is the master of the vast
universe, he is called Maheswara. The whole universe is pervaded by him
in diverse forms. It is that deity whose mouth roars and burns the waters
of the sea in the form of the huge mare's head!'"[618]



SECTION CLXII

"Vaisampayana said, 'After Krishna, the son of Devaki, had said these
words, Yudhishthira once more asked Bhishma the son of Santanu, saying,
'O thou of great intelligence; O foremost of all persons conversant with
duties, which, indeed, of the two, direct perception and the scriptures,
is to be regarded as authority for arriving at a conclusion?'

"Bhishma said, 'I think, there is no doubt in this. Listen to me, O thou
of great wisdom! I shall answer thee. The question thou hast asked is
certainly proper. It is easy to cherish doubt. But the solution of that
doubt is difficult. Innumerable are the instances, in respect of both
direct perception and audition (or the scriptures), in which doubts may
arise. Certain persons, who delight in the name of logicians, verily
imagining themselves to be possessed of superior wisdom, affirm that
direct perception is the only authority. They assert that nothing,
however true, is existent which is not directly perceivable; or, at least
they doubt the existence of those objects. Indeed, such assertions
involve an absurdity and they who make them are of foolish understanding,
whatever may be their pride of learning. If, on the other hand, thou
doubtest as to how the one (indivisible Brahman) could be the cause, I
answer that one would understand it only after a long course of years and
with the assistance of Yoga practised without idleness. Indeed, O
Bharata, one that lives according to such means as present themselves
(without, i.e., one's being wedded to this or that settled mode of life),
and one that is devoted (to the solution of the question), would be
capable of understanding it. None else, truly, is competent for
comprehending it. When one attains to the very end of reasons (or
reasoning processes), one then attains to that excellent and all
comprehending knowledge--that vast mass of effulgence which illumines all
the universe (called Brahma). That knowledge, O king, which is derived
from reason (or inferences) can scarcely be said to be knowledge. Such
knowledge should be rejected. It should be noted that it is not defined
or comprehended by the word. It should, therefore, be rejected!'"[619]

"Yudhisthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, which among these (four) is
most authoritative, viz., direct perception, inference from observation,
the science of Agama or scriptures, and diverse kinds of practices that
distinguish the good.'

"Bhishma said, 'While Righteousness is sought to be destroyed by wicked
persons possessed of great might, it is capable of being protected for
the time being by those that are good exerting themselves with care and
earnestness. Such protection, however, avails not in the long run, for
destruction does overtake Righteousness at the end. Then, again,
Righteousness often proves a mask for covering Unrighteousness, like
grass and straw covering the mouth of a deep pit and concealing it from
the view. Hear, again, O Yudhisthira! In consequence of this, the
practices of the good are interfered with and destroyed by the wicked.
Those persons who are of evil conduct, who discard the Srutis--indeed,
those wicked wights who are haters of Righteousness,--destroy that good
course of conduct (which could otherwise be set up as a standard). Hence,
doubts attach to direct perception, inference, and good conduct.[620]
Those, therefore, among the good that are possessed of understanding born
of (or cleansed by) the scriptures and that are ever contented, are to be
regarded as the foremost. Let those that are anxious and deprived of
tranquillity of soul, approach these. Indeed, O Yudhishthira., do thou
pay court to them and seek of them the solutions of thy doubt![621]
Disregarding both pleasure and wealth which always follow cupidity and
awakened into the belief that only Righteousness should be sought, do
thou, O Yudhishthira, wait upon and ask those persons (for enlightening
thyself). The conduct of those persons never goes wrong or meets with
destruction, as also their sacrifices and Vedic study and rites. Indeed,
these three, viz., conduct as consisting of overt acts, behaviour in
respect of (mental) purity, and the Vedas together constitute
Righteousness.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'O grandsire, my understanding is once more stupefied
by doubt. I am on this side the ocean, employed in searching after the
means of crossing it. I do not, however, behold the other shore of the
ocean! If these three, viz., the Vedas, direct perception (or acts that
are seen), and behaviour (or, mental purity) together constitute what is
to be regarded as authority, it can be alleged that there is difference
between them. Righteousness then becomes really of three kinds, although
it is one and indivisible.'

"Bhishma said, 'Righteousness is sometimes seen to be destroyed by wicked
wights of great power. If thou thinkest, O king, that Righteousness
should really be of three kinds, my reply is that thy conclusion is
warranted by reason. The truth is that Righteousness is one and
indivisible, although it is capable of being viewed from three different
points. The paths (indications) of those three that constitute the
foundation of Righteousness have each been laid down. Do thou act
according to the instructions laid down. Thou shouldst never wrangle
about Righteousness and then seek to have those doubts solved into which
thou mayst arrive. O chief of the Bharatas, let no doubts like these ever
take possession of thy mind! Do thou obey what I say without scruple of
any kind. Follow me like a blind man or like one who, without being
possessed of sense himself, has to depend upon that of another.
Abstention from injury, truth, absence of wrath (or forgiveness), and
liberality of gifts,--these four, O king, that hast no foe, do thou
practise, for these four constitute eternal Righteousness! Do thou also,
O mighty-armed prince, pursue that conduct towards the Brahmanas which is
consistent with what has been observed towards them by thy sires and
grandsires. These are the principal indications of Righteousness. That
man of little intelligence who would destroy the weight of authority by
denying that to be a standard which has always been accepted as such
would himself fail to become an authority among men. Such a man becomes
the cause of much grief in the world. Do thou reverence the Brahmanas and
treat them with hospitality. Do thou always serve them in this way. The
universe rests on them. Do thou understand them to be such!'

"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell me, O grandsire, what the respective ends are
of those that hate Righteousness and of those that adore and observe it!'

"Bhishma said, 'Those men that hate Righteousness are said to have their
hearts overwhelmed by the attributes of passion and darkness. Such men
have always to go to Hell. Those men, on the other hand, O monarch, who
always adore and observe Righteousness, those men who are devoted to
truth and sincerity, are called good. They always enjoy the pleasures or
felicity of heaven. In consequence of their waiting upon their preceptors
with reverence their hearts always turn towards Righteousness. Verily,
they who adore Righteousness attain to the regions of the deities. Those
individuals, whether human beings or deities who divest themselves of
cupidity and malice and who emaciate or afflict their bodies by the
observance of austerities, succeed, in consequence of the Righteousness
which then becomes theirs to attain to great felicity. Those that are
gifted with wisdom have said that the Brahmanas, who are the eldest sons
of Brahmana, represent Righteousness. They that are righteous always
worship them, their hearts regarding them with as much love and affection
as a hungry man's stomach entertains for ripe and delicious fruits.'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What is the appearance presented by those that are
wicked, and what are those acts which they that are called good are to
do? Explain to me this, O holy one! Indeed, tell me what the indications
are of the good and the wicked.'

"Bhishma said, 'They that are wicked are evil in their practices,
ungovernable or incapable of being kept within the restraints of rules,
and foul mouthed. They, on the other hand, they are good, are always good
in their acts. Verily, the acts these men do are regarded as the
indications of that course of conduct which is called good. They that are
good or righteous, O monarch, never answer the two calls of nature on the
public road, or in the midst of a cow-pen, or on a field of paddy, After
feeding the five they take their own food.[622] They never talk while
eating, and never go to sleep with wet hands (i.e., without rubbing them
dry with towels or napkins). Whenever they see any of the following, they
circumambulate them for showing them reverence, viz., a blazing fire, a
bull, the image of a deity, a cow-pen, a place where four roads meet, and
an old and virtuous Brahmana. They give the way, themselves standing
aside, unto those that are old, those that are afflicted with burdens,
ladies, those that hold high appointments in the village or town
administration, Brahmanas, kine, and kings. The righteous or good man is
he that protects his guests, servants and other dependents, his own
relatives, and all those that seek his protection. Such a man always
welcomes these with the usual enquiries of politeness. Two times have
been appointed by the deities for human beings to take their food, viz.,
morning and evening. During the interval one should not eat anything. By
following this rule about eating, one is said to observe a fast. As the
sacred fire waits for libations to be poured upon it when the hour for
Homa arrives, even so a woman, when her functional period is over,
expects an act of congress with her husband. One that never approaches
one's spouses at any other time save after the functional period, is said
to observe the vow of Brahmacharya. Amrita (nectar), Brahmanas, and
kine,--these three are regarded as equal. Hence, one should always
worship, with due rites, Brahmanas and kine. One does not incur any fault
or stain by eating the meat of animals slain in sacrifices with the aid
of Tantras from the Yajur Veda. The flesh of the back-bone, or that of
animals not slain in sacrifice, should be avoided even as one avoids the
flesh of one's own son. One should never cause one's guest to go without
food whether when one resides in one's own country or in a foreign land.
After completing one's study one should present the Dakshina unto one's
preceptor. When one sees one's preceptor, one should congratulate him
with reverence and worshipping him present him a seat. By worshipping
one's preceptor, one increases the period of one's life as also one's
fame and prosperity. One should never censure the old, nor send them on
any business[623]. One should never be seated when any one that is old is
standing. By acting in this way one protects the duration of one's life.
One should never cast one's eyes on a naked woman, nor a naked man. One
should never indulge in sexual congress except in privacy. One should eat
also without being seen by others. Preceptors are the foremost of
Tirthas; the heart is the foremost of all sacred objects; knowledge is
the foremost of all objects of search; and contentment is the foremost of
all happiness. Morning and evening one should listen to the grave
counsels of those that are aged. One attains to wisdom by constant
waiting upon those that are venerable for years. While reading the Vedas
or employed in eating, one should use one's right hand. One should always
keep one's speech and mind under thorough control, as also one's senses.
With well-cooked frumenty, Yavaka, Krisara, and Havi (clarified butter),
one should worship the Pitris and the deities in the Sraddha called
Ashtaka. The same should be used in worshipping the Planets. One should
not undergo a shave without calling down a blessing upon oneself. If one
sneezes, one should be blessed by those present. All that are ill or
afflicted with disease, should be blessed. The extension of their lives
should be prayed for.[624] One should never address an eminent person
familiarly (by using the word Twam). Under even the great difficulties
one should never do this. To address such a person as Twam and to slay
him are equal, persons of learning are degraded by such a style of
address. Unto those that are inferior, or equal, or unto disciples, such
a word can be used. The heart of the sinful man always proclaims the sins
he has committed. Those men who have deliberately committed sins meet
with destruction by seeking to conceal them from the good. Indeed, they
that are confirmed sinners seek to conceal their sinful acts from
others.[625] Such persons think that their sins are witnessed by neither
men nor the deities. The sinful man, overwhelmed by his sins, takes birth
in a miserable order of being. The sins of such a man continually grow,
even as the interest the usurer charge (on the loans he grants) increase
from day to day. If, having committed a sin, one seeks to have it covered
by righteousness, that sin becomes destroyed and leads to righteousness
instead of other sins.[626] If a quantity of water be poured upon salt,
the latter immediately dissolves away. Even so when expiation is
performed, sin dissolves away. For these reasons one should never conceal
a sin. Concealed, it is certain to increase. Having committed a sin, one
should confess it in the presence of those that are good. They would
destroy it immediately. If one does not enjoy in good time what one has
stored with hope, the consequence is that the stored wealth finds another
owner after the death of him who has stored it. The wise have said that
the mind of every creature is the true test of Righteousness. Hence, all
creatures in the world have an innate tendency to achieve Righteousness.
One should achieve Righteousness alone or single-handed. Verily, one
should not proclaim oneself Righteous and walk with the standard of
Righteousness borne aloft for purpose of exhibition. They are said to be
traders in Righteousness who practise it for enjoying the fruits it
brings about. One should adore the deities without giving way to
sentiments of pride. Similarly, one should serve one's preceptor without
deceit. One should make arrangements for securing to oneself invaluable
wealth in the hereafter which consists in gifts made here to deserving
persons.'"



SECTION CLXVIII

"Yudhishthira said, 'It is seen that if a person happens to be
unfortunate, he fails to acquire wealth, how great so ever his strength.
On the other hand, if one happens to be fortunate, he comes to the
possession of wealth, even if he be a weakling or a fool. When, again,
the time does not come for acquisition, one cannot make an acquisition
with even one's best exertion. When, however, the time comes for
acquisition, one wins great wealth without any exertion. Hundreds of men
may be seen who achieve no result even when they exert their best. Many
persons, again, are seen to make acquisitions without any exertion. If,
wealth were the result of exertion, then one could, with exertion,
acquire it immediately. Verily, if the case were so, no man of learning
could then be seen to take the protection for the sake of his livelihood,
of one destitute of learning, Among men, that which is not (destined) to
be attained, O chief of the Bharatas, is never attained. Men are seen to
fail in achieving results even with the aid of their best exertions. One
may be seen to seek wealth by hundreds of means (and yet failing to
acquire it); while another, without at all seeking it, becomes happy in
its possession. Men may be seen doing evil acts continually (for wealth)
and yet failing to acquire it. Others are in the enjoyment of wealth
without doing any evil act whatever. Others, again, who are observant of
the duties assigned to them by the scriptures, are without wealth. One
may be seen to be without any knowledge of the science of morals and
policy even after one has studied all the treatises on that science. One,
again, may be seen appointed as the prime minister of a king without
having at all studied the science of morals and policy. A learned man may
be seen that is possessed of wealth. One destitute of learning may be
seen owning wealth. Both kinds of men, again, may be seen to be entirely
destitute of wealth. If, by the acquisition of learning one could acquire
the happiness of wealth, then no man of learning could be found living,
for the very means of his subsistence, under the protection of one
destitute of learning. Indeed, if one could obtain by the acquisition of
learning, all desirable objects like a thirsty individual having his
thirst slaked upon obtaining water, then none in this world would have
shown idleness in acquiring learning. If, one's time has not come, one
does not die even if one be pierced with hundreds of shafts. On the other
hand, one lays down one's life, if one's hour has come, even if it be a
blade of grass with which one is struck.'

"Bhishma said, 'If one, setting oneself to undertaking involving even
great exertions, fails to earn wealth, one should then practise severe
austerities. Unless seeds be sown, no crops appear. It is by making gifts
(to deserving persons in this life) that one acquires (in one's next
life) numerous objects of enjoyment, even as one becomes possessed of
intelligence and wisdom by waiting upon those that are venerable for
years. The wise have said that one becomes possessed of longevity by
practising the duty of abstention from cruelty to all creatures. Hence,
one should make gifts and not solicit (or accept them when made by
others). One should worship those individuals that are righteous. Verily,
one should be sweet-speeched towards all, and always do what is agreeable
to others. One should seek to attain to purity (both mental and
external). Indeed, one should always abstain from doing injury to any
creature. When in the matter of the happiness and woe of even insects and
ants, their acts (of this and past lives) and Nature constitute the
cause, it is meet, O Yudhishthira, that thou shouldst he tranquil!'"[627]



SECTION CLXIV

"Bhishma said, 'If one does acts oneself that are good or causes others
to accomplish them, one should then expect to attain to the merits of
righteousness. Similarly, if one does acts oneself that are evil, and
causes others to accomplish them, one should never expect to attain to
the merits of righteousness.[628] At all times, it is Time that, entering
the understandings of all creatures, sets them to acts of righteousness
or unrighteousness, and then confer felicity or misery upon them. When a
person, beholding the fruits of Righteousness, understands Righteousness
to be superior, it is then that he inclines towards Righteousness and
puts faith in it. One, however, whose understanding is not firm, fails to
put faith in it, As regards faith in Righteousness, it is this (and
nothing else). To put faith in Righteousness is the indication of the
wisdom of all persons. One that is acquainted with both (i.e., what
should be done and what should not be done), with a view to
opportuneness, should, with care and devotion, achieve what is right.
Those Righteous men who have in this life been blessed with affluence,
acting of their own motion, take particular care of their souls so that
they may not, in their next lives, have to take birth as persons with the
attribute of Passion predominating in them. Time (which is the supreme
disposer of all things) can never make Righteousness the cause of misery.
One should, therefore, know that the soul which is righteous is certainly
pure (i.e., freed from the element of evil and misery). As regards
Unrighteousness, it may be said that, even when of large proportions, it
is incapable of even touching Righteousness which is always protected by
Time and which shines like a blazing fire. These are the two results
achieved by Righteousness, viz., the stainlessness of the soul and
unsusceptibility of being touched by Unrighteousness. Verily,
Righteousness is fraught with victory. Its effulgence is so great that it
illumines the three worlds. A man of wisdom cannot catch hold of a sinful
person and forcibly cause him to become righteous. When seriously urged
to act righteously, the sinful only act with hypocrisy, impelled by fear.
They that are righteous among the Sudras never betake themselves to such
hypocrisy under the plea that persons of the Sudra order are not
permitted to live according to any of the four prescribed modes. I shall
tell thee particularly what the duties truly are of the four orders. So
far as their bodies are concerned, the individuals belonging to all the
four orders have the five primal elements for the constituent
ingredients. Indeed, in this respect, they are all of the same substance.
For all that, distinctions exist between them in respect of both
practices relating to life or the world and the duties of righteousness.
Notwithstanding these distinctions, sufficient liberty of action is left
to them in consequence of which all individuals may attain to an equality
of condition. The regions of felicity which represent the consequences or
rewards of Righteousness are not eternal, for they are destined to come
to an end. Righteousness, however, is eternal. When the cause is eternal,
why is the effect not so?[629] The answer to this is as follows. Only
that Righteousness is eternal which is not promoted by the desire of
fruit or reward. (That Righteous, however, which is prompted by the
desire of reward, not eternal. Hence, the reward though undesired that
attaches to the first kind of Righteousness, viz., attainment of identity
with Brahman, is eternal. The reward, however, that attaches to that
Righteousness prompted by desire of fruit. Heaven is not eternal).[630]
All men are equal in respect of their physical organism. All of them,
again, are possessed of souls that are equal in respect of their nature.
When dissolution comes, all else dissolve away. What remains is the
inceptive will to achieve Righteousness. That, indeed, reappears (in next
life) of itself.[631] When such is the result (that is, when the
enjoyments and endurance of this life are due to the acts of a past
life), the inequality of lot discernible among human beings cannot be
regarded in any way anomalous. So also, it is seen that those creatures
that belong to the intermediate orders of existence are equally subject,
in the matter of their acts, to the influence of example.'"



SECTION CLXV

"Vaisampayana said, 'That perpetuator of Kuru's race, viz., Yudhishthira
the son of Pandu, desirous of obtaining such good as is destructive of
sins, questioned Bhishma who was lying on a bed of arrows, (in the
following words).'

"Yudhishthira said, 'What, indeed, is beneficial for a person in this
world? What is that by doing which one may earn happiness? By what may
one be cleansed of all one's sins? Indeed, what is that which is
destructive of sins?'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'In this connection, the royal son of Santanu, O
foremost of men, duly recited the names of the deities unto Yudhishthira
who was desirous of hearing.'

"Bhishma said, 'O son, the following names of the deities with those of
the Rishis, if duly recited morning, noon, and evening, become
efficacious cleansers of all sins. Acting with the aid of one's senses
(or knowledge and action), whatever sins one may commit by day or by
night or by the two twilights, consciously, or unconsciously one is sure
to be cleansed therefrom and become thoroughly pure by reciting these
names. One that takes those names has never to become blind or deaf;
indeed, by taking those names, one always succeeds in attaining to what
is beneficial. Such a man never takes birth in the intermediate order of
beings, never goes to hell, and never becomes a human being of any of the
mixed castes. He has never to fear the accession of any calamity. When
death comes, he never becomes stupefied. The master of all the deities
and Asuras, resplendent with effulgence, worshipped by all creatures,
inconceivable, indescribable, the life of all living beings, and unborn,
is the Grandsire Brahma, the Lord of the universe. His chaste spouse is
Savitri. Then comes that origin of the Vedas, the creator Vishnu,
otherwise called Narayana of immeasurable puissance. Then comes the
three-eyed Lord of Lima; then Skanda the generalissimo of the celestial
forces; then Visakha; then Agni the eater of sacrificial libations; then
Vayu the god of wind; then Chandramas; then Aditya the god of the sun,
endued with effulgence; then the illustrious Sakra the lord of Sachi; and
Yama with his spouse Dhumorna; and Varuna with Gauri; Kuvera the lord of
treasures, with his spouse Riddhi; the amiable and illustrious cow
Surabhi; the great Rishi Visravas; Sankalpa, Ocean, Gangs: the other
sacred Rivers; the diverse Maruts; the Valkhilyas crowned with success of
penances; the island-born Krishna; Narada; Parvata; Viswavasu; the Hahas;
the Huhus; Tumvuru; Chitrasena; the celestial messenger of wide
celebrity; the highly blessed celestial maidens; the celestial Apsaras,
Urvasi, Menaka, Rambha; Misrakesi, Alamvusha, Viswachi, Ghritachi,
Panchachuda, Tilottama, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Aswins, the Pitris;
Dharma (Righteousness); Vedic lore, Penances, Diksha, Perseverance (in
religious acts), the Grandsire, Day and Night, Kasyapa the son of
Marichi, Sukra, Vrihaspati, Mangala the son of Earth, Vudha, Rahu,
Sanischara, the Constellations, the Seasons, the Months, the Fortnights,
the Year, Garuda, the son of Vinata, the several Oceans, the sons of
Kadru, viz., the Snakes, Satadru, Vipasa, Chandrabhaga, Saraswati,
Sindhu, Devika, Prabhasa, the lakes of Pushkara, Ganga, Mahanadi, Vena,
Kaveri, Narmada, Kulampuna Visalya, Karatoya, Amvuvahini. Sarayu,
Gandaki, the great river Lohita, Tamra, Aruna, Vetravati, Parnasa,
Gautami, the Godavari, Vena, Krishnavena, Dwija, Drishadvati, Kaveri,
Vankhu, Mandakini Prayaga, Prabhasa, the sacred Naimisha, the spot sacred
to Visweswara or Mahadeva, viz., Kasi, that lake of crystal water,
Kurukshetra full of many sacred waters, the foremost of oceans (viz., the
ocean of milk), Penances, Gifts, Jamvumarga, Hiranwati, Vitasta, the
river Plakshavati, Vedasmriti, Vedavati, Malava, Aswavati, all sacred
spots on Earth, Gangadwara, the sacred Rishikulya, the river Chitravaha,
the Charmanwati, the sacred river Kausiki, the Yamuna, the river
Bhimarathi, the great river Vahuda, Mahendravani, Tridiva Nilika,
Saraswati, Nanda, the other Nanda, the large sacred lake, Gaya,
Phalgutirtha Dharmarayana (the sacred forest) that is peopled with the
deities, the sacred celestial river, the lake created by the Grandsire
Brahma which is sacred and celebrated over the three worlds, and
auspicious and capable of cleansing all sins, the Himavat mountain endued
with excellent herbs, the Vindhya mountain variegated with diverse kinds
of metals, containing many Tirthas and overgrown with medicinal herbs.
Meru, Mahendra, Malaya, Sweta endued with silver, Sringavat, Mandara,
Nila, Nishada, Dardurna, Chitrakuta, Anjanabha, the Gandhamadana
mountains; the sacred Somagiri, the various other mountains, the cardinal
points of the compass, the subsidiary points, the Earth, all the trees,
the Viswedevas, the Firmament, the Constellations, the Planets, and the
deities,--let these all, named and unnamed, rescue and cleanse us! The
man who takes the names of these becomes cleansed of all his sins. By
hymning their praises and gratifying them, one becomes freed from every
fear. Verily, the man who delights in uttering the hymns in praise of the
deities becomes cleansed of all such sins as lead to birth in impure
orders. After this recital of the deities, I shall name those learned
Brahmanas crowned with ascetic merit and success and capable of cleaning
one of every sin. They are Yavakrita and Raibhya and Kakshivat and
Aushija, and Bhrigu and Angiras and Kanwa, and the puissant Medhatithi,
and Varhi possessed of every accomplishment. These all belong to the
eastern region. Others, viz., Unmuchu, Pramuchu, all highly blessed,
Swastyatreya of great energy, Agastya of great prowess, the son of Mitra
and Varuna; Dridhayu and Urdhavahu, those two foremost and celebrated of
Rishis,--these live in the southern region. Listen now to me as I name
those Rishis that dwell in the western region. They are Ushango with his
uterine brothers, Parivyadha of great energy, Dirghatamas, Gautama,
Kasyapa, Ekata, Dwita, Trita, the righteous-souled son of Atri (viz.,
Durvasa), and puissant Saraswat. Listen now to me as I name those Rishis
that worship the deities in sacrifices, dwelling in the northern region.
They are Atri, Vasishtha, Saktri, Parasara's son Vyasa of great energy;
Viswamitra, Bharadwaja, Jamadagni, the son of Richika, Rama, Auddalaka,
Swetaketu, Kohala, Vipula, Devala, Devasarman, Dhaumya, Hastikasyapa,
Lomasa, Nachiketa, Lomaharsana, Ugrasravas, and Bhrigu's son Chyavana.
This is the tale of Rishis possessed of Vedic lore. They are primeval
Rishis, O king, whose names, if taken, are capable of cleansing one of
every sin. After this I shall recite the names of the principal kings.
They are Nriga, Yayati, Nahusha, Yadu, Puru of great energy, Sagara,
Dhundhumara, Dilipa of great prowess, Krisaswa, Yauvanaswa, Chitraswa,
Satyavat, Dushmanta, Bharata who became an illustrious Emperor over many
kings, Yavana, Janaka, Dhrishtaratha, Raghu, that foremost of kings,
Dasaratha, the heroic Rama, that slayer of Rakshasas, Sasavindu.
Bhagiratha, Harischandra, Marutta, Dridharatha, the highly fortunate
Alarka, Aila, Karandhama, that foremost of men, Kasmira, Daksha,
Amvarisha, Kukura, Raivata of great fame, Kuru, Samvarana, Mandhatri of
unbaffled prowess, the royal sage Muchukunda, Jahnu who was much favoured
by Janhavi (Ganga), the first (in point of time) of all kings, viz.,
Prithu the son of Vena, Mitrabhanu, Priyankara, Trasadasyu, Sweta that
foremost of royal sages, the celebrated Mahabhisha, Nimi Ashtaka, Ayu,
the royal sage Kshupa, Kaksheyu, Pratardana, Devodasa, Sudasa,
Kosaleswara, Aila, Nala, the royal sage Manu, that lord of all creatures,
Havidhara, Prishadhara, Pratipa, Santanu, Aja, the senior Varhi, Ikshwaku
of great fame, Anaranya, Janujangha, the royal sage Kakshasena, and many
others not named (in history). That man who rising at early dawn takes
the names of these kings at the two twilights, viz., at sunset and
sunrise, with a pure body and mind and without distracted attention,
acquires great religious merit. One should hymn the praises of the
deities, the celestial Rishis, and the royal sages and say, 'These lords
of the creation will ordain my growth and long life and fame! Let no
calamity be mine, let no sin defile me, and let there be no opponents or
enemies of mine! Without doubt, victory will always be mine and an
auspicious end hereafter!'"



SECTION CLXVI

"Janamejaya said, 'When that foremost person among the Kauravas, viz.,
Bhishma, was lying on a bed of arrows,--a bed that is always coveted by
heroes,--and when the Pandavas, were sitting around him, my great
grandsire Yudhishthira of much wisdom, heard these expositions of
mysteries with respect to the subject of duty and had all his doubts
solved. He heard also what the ordinance are that apply to the subjects
of gifts, and thus had all his doubts removed with respect to the topics
of righteousness and wealth. It behoveth thee, O learned Brahmana, to
tell me now what else did the great Pandava king do.'

"Vaisampayana said, 'When Bhishma became silent, the entire circle of
king (who were seated around him) became perfectly silent. Indeed, they
all sat motionless there, like figures painted on canvass. Then Vyasa the
son of Satyavati, having reflected for a moment, addressed the royal son
of Ganga, saying, 'O king, the Kuru chief Yudhishthira has been restored
to his own nature, along with all brothers and followers. With Krishna of
great intelligence by his side, he bends his head in reverence unto thee.
It behoveth thee to give him leave for returning to the city.' Thus
addressed by the holy Vyasa, the royal son of Santanu and Ganga dismissed
Yudhishthira and his counsellors. The royal son of Santanu, addressing
his grandson in a sweet voice, also said, 'Do thou return to the city, O
king! Let fever of thy heart be dispelled. Do thou adore the deities in
diverse sacrifices distinguished by large gifts of food and wealth, like
Yayati himself, O foremost of kings, endued with devotion and
self-restraint. Devoted to the practice of the Kshatriya order, do thou,
O son of Pritha, gratify the Pitris and the deities. Thou shalt then earn
great benefits. Indeed, let the fever of thy heart be dispelled. Do thou
gladden all thy subjects. Do thou assure them and establish peace among
all. Do thou also honour all thy well-wishers with such rewards as they
deserve! Let all thy friends and well-wishers live, depending on thee for
their means, even as birds live, depending for their means upon a
full-grown tree charged with fruit and standing on a sacred spot. When
the hour comes for my departure from this world, do thou come here, O
king. The time when I shall take leave of my body is that period when the
sun, stopping in his south-ward course, will begin to return northwards!'
The son of Kunti answered, 'So be it!' And saluted his grandsire with
reverence and then set out, with all his relatives and followers, for the
city called after the elephant. Placing Dhritarashtra at the head and
also Gandhari who was exceedingly devoted to her lord, and accompanied by
the Rishis and Kesava, as also by the citizens and the inhabitants of the
country and by his counsellors, O monarch, that foremost one of Kuru's
race entered the city named after the elephant.'"



SECTION CLXVII

"Vaisampayana said, 'Then the royal son of Kunti, having duly honoured
the citizens and the inhabitants of the province, dismissed them to their
respective homes. The Pandava king then consoled these women, who had
lost their heroic husbands and sons in the battle, with abundant gift of
wealth. Having recovered his kingdom, Yudhishthira of great wisdom caused
himself to be duly installed on the throne. That foremost of men then
assured all his subjects by diverse acts of good will. That foremost of
righteous men then set himself to earn the substantial blessing of the
Brahmanas, of the foremost military officers, and the leading citizens.
The blessed monarch having passed fifty nights in the capital recollected
the time indicated by his grandsire as the hour of his departure from
this world. Accompanied by a number of priests he then set out of the
city named after the elephant, having seen that the sun ceasing to go
southwards had begun to proceed in his northward course. Yudhishthira the
son of Kunti took with him a large quantity of clarified butter and
floral garlands and scents and silken cloths and excellent sandalwood and
Aquilaria Agallocha and dark sloe wood, for cremating the body of
Bhishma. Diverse kinds of costly garlands and gems also were among those
stores. Placing Dhritarashtra ahead and queen Gandhari celebrated for her
virtues, and his own mother Kunti and all his brothers also, Yudhishthira
of great intelligence, accompanied by Krishna and Vidura of great wisdom,
as also by Yuyutsu and Yuyudhana, and by his other relatives and
followers forming a large train, proceeded, his praises hymned the while
by eulogists and bards. The sacrificial fires of Bhishma were also borne
in the procession. Thus accompanied, the king set out from his city like
a second chief of the deities. Soon he came upon the spot where the son
of Santanu was till lying on his bed of arrows. He beheld his grandsire
waited upon with reverence by Parasara's son Vyasa of great intelligence,
by Narada, O royal sage, by Devala and Asita, and also by the remnant of
unslain kings assembled from various parts of the country. Indeed, the
king saw that his high-souled grandsire, as he lay on his heroic bed, was
guarded on all sides by the warriors appointed for that duty. Alighting
from his car, King Yudhishthira with his brothers saluted his grandsire,
the chastiser of all foes. They also saluted the Rishis with the
island-born Vyasa at their head. They were saluted in return by them.
Accompanied by his priests each of whom resembled the grandsire Brahman
himself, as also by his brothers, Yudhishthira of unfading glory then
approached that spot whereon Bhishma lay on his bed of arrows surrounded
by these reverend Rishis. Then king Yudhishthira the just, at the head of
his brothers, addressed that foremost one of Kuru's race, viz., the son
of the River Ganga, as he lay on that bed of his, saying, 'I am
Yudhishthira, O king! Salutations to thee, O son of the River Janhavi! If
thou hearest me still, tell me what I am to do for thee! Bearing with me
thy sacrificial fires, I have come here, O king, and wait upon thee at
the hour indicated! Preceptors of all branches of learning, Brahmanas,
Ritwiks, all my brothers, thy son, viz., king Dhritarashtra of great
energy, are all here with my counsellors as also Vasudeva of great
prowess. The remnant of unslain warriors, and all the denizens of
Kurujangala, are also here. Opening thy eyes, O chief of Kuru's race, do
thou behold them! Whatever should be done on this occasion has all been
arranged and provided for by me. Indeed, at this hour which thou hadst
indicated, all things have been kept ready!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Kunti's son of great
intelligence, the son of Ganga opened his eyes and saw all the Bharatas
assembled there and standing around him. The mighty Bhishma then, taking
the strong hand of Yudhishthira, addressed him in a voice deep as that of
the clouds. That thorough master of words said, 'By good luck, O son of
Kunti, thou hast come here with all thy counsellors, O Yudhishthira! The
thousand-rayed maker of day, the holy Surya has begun his northward
course. I have been lying on my bed here for eight and fifty nights.
Stretched on these sharp-pointed arrows I have felt this period to be as
long as if it was a century. O Yudhishthira, the lunar month of Magha has
come. This is, again, the lighted fortnight and a fourth part of it ought
by this (according to my calculations) be over.' Having said so unto
Yudhishthira the son of Dharma, Ganga's son Bhishma then saluted
Dhritarashtra and said unto him as follows.'

"Bhishma said, 'O king, thou art well-conversant with duties. All thy
doubts, again, relating to the science of wealth have been well-solved.
Thou hast waited upon many Brahmanas of great learning. The subtle
sciences connected with the Vedas, all the duties of religion, O king,
and the whole of the four Vedas, are well-known to thee! Thou shouldst
not grieve, therefore, O son of Kuru! That which was pre-ordained has
happened. It could not be otherwise. Thou hast heard the mysteries
relating to the deities from the lips of the island-born Rishi himself.
Yudhishthira and his brothers are morally as much thy sons as they are
the sons of Pandu. Observant of the duties of religion, do thou cherish
and protect them. In their turn, they are always devoted to the service
of their seniors. King Yudhishthira the just is pure-souled. He will
always prove obedient to thee! I know that he is devoted to the virtue of
compassion or abstention from injury. He is devoted to his seniors and
preceptors. Thy sons were all wicked-souled. They were wedded to wrath
and cupidity. Overwhelmed by envy, they were all of wicked behavior. It
behoveth thee not to grieve for them!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said this much unto Dhritarashtra of
great wisdom, the Kuru hero then addressed Vasudeva of mighty arms.'

"Bhishma said, 'O holy one, O god of all gods, O thou that art worshipped
by all the deities and Asuras, O thou that didst cover the three worlds
with three steps of thine, salutations to thee, O wielder of the conch,
the discus, and the mace! Thou art Vasudeva, thou art of golden body,
thou art the one Purusha (or active agent), thou art the creator (of the
universe), thou art of vast proportions. Thou art Jiva. Thou art subtle.
Thou art the Supreme and eternal Soul. Do thou, O lotus-eyed one, rescue
me, O foremost of all beings! Do thou, give me permission, O Krishna, to
depart from this world, O thou that art Supreme felicity, O foremost of
all beings! The sons of Pandu should ever be protected by thee. Thou art,
indeed, already their sole refuge. Formerly, I spoke to the foolish
Duryodhana of wicked understanding that thither is Righteousness where
Krishna is, and that there is victory where Righteousness is. I further
counselled him that relying on Vasudeva as his refuge, he should make
peace with the Pandavas. Indeed, I repeatedly told him, 'This is the
fittest time for thee to make peace! The foolish Duryodhana of wicked
understanding, however, did not do my bidding. Having caused a great
havoc on earth, at last, he himself laid down his life. Thee, O
illustrious one, I know to be that ancient and best of Rishis who dwelt
for many years in the company of Nara, in the retreat of Vadari. The
celestial Rishi Narada told me this, as also Vyasa of austere penances.
Even they have said unto me that. Thyself and Arjuna are the old Rishis
Narayana and Nara born among men. Do thou, O Krishna, grant me leave, I
shall cast off my body. Permitted by thee, I shall attain to the highest
end!'

"Vasudeva said, 'I give thee leave, O Bhishma! Do thou, O king, attain to
the status of the Vasus, O thou of great splendour, thou hast not been
guilty of a single transgression in this world. O royal sage, thou art
devoted to thy sire. Thou art, therefore, like a second Markandeya! It is
for that reason that death depends upon thy pleasure even as thy slave
expectant of reading thy pleasure!'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'Having said these words, the son of Ganga once
more addressed the Pandavas headed by Dhritarashtra, and other friends
and well-wishers of his, 'I desire to cast off my lifebreaths. It
behoveth you to give me leave. Ye should strive for attaining to truth.
Truth constitutes the highest power. Ye should always live with Brahmanas
of righteous conduct, devoted to penances, ever abstaining from cruel
behaviour, and who have their souls under control!' Having said these
words unto his friends and embraced them all, the intelligent Bhishma
once more addressed Yudhishthira, saying, 'O king, let all Brahmanas,
especially those that are endued with wisdom, let them who are
preceptors, let those who are priests capable of assisting as sacrifices,
be adorable in thy estimation.'"



SECTION CLXVIII

"Vaisampayana said, 'Having said so unto all the Kurus, Bhishma, the son
of Santanu, remained silent for sometime, O chastiser of foes He then
held forth his life-breaths successively in those parts of his body which
are indicated in Yoga. The life-breaths of that high-souled one,
restrained duly, then rose up. Those parts of the body of Santanu's son,
in consequence of the adoption, of Yoga, from which the life-breaths went
up, became soreless one after another. In the midst of those high-souled
persons, including those great Rishis with Vyasa at their head, the sight
seemed to be a strange one, O king. Within a short time, the entire body
of Bhishma became shaftless and soreless. Beholding it, all those
distinguished personages with Vasudeva at their head, and all the
ascetics with Vyasa, became filled with wonder. The life-breaths,
restrained and unable to escape through any of the outlets, at last
pierced through the crown of the head and proceeded upwards to heaven.
The celestial kettle-drums began to play and floral showers were rained
down. The Siddhas and regenerate Rishis, filled with delight, exclaimed,
'Excellent, Excellent!' 'The life-breaths of Bhishma, piercing through
the crown of his head, shot up through the welkin like a large meteor and
soon became invisible. Even thus, O great king, did Santanu's son, that
pillar of Bharata's race, united himself with eternity. Then the
high-souled Pandavas and Vidura, taking a large quantity of wood and
diverse kinds of fragrant scents, made a funeral pyre. Yuyutsu and others
stood as spectators of the preparations. Then Yudhishthira and the
high-souled Vidura wrapped Bhishma's body with silken cloth and floral
garlands. Yuyutsu held an excellent umbrella, over it Bhimasena and
Arjuna both held in their hands a couple of yak-tails of pure white. The
two sons of Madri held two head-gears in their hands. Yudhishthira and
Dhritarashtra stood at the feet of the lord of the Kurus, taking up
palmyra fans, stood around the body and began to fan it softly. The Pitri
sacrifice of the high-souled Bhishma was then duly performed. Many
libations were poured upon the sacred fire. The singers of Samans sang
many Samans. Then covering the body of Ganga's son with sandal wood and
black aloe and the bark wood, other fragrant fuel, and setting fire to
the same, the Kurus with Dhritarashtra and others, stood on the right
sight of the funeral pyre. Those foremost ones of Kuru's race, having
thus cremated the body of the son of Ganga, proceeded to the sacred
Bhagirathi, accompanied by the Rishis. They were followed by Vyasa, by
Narada, by Asita, by Krishna, by the ladies of the Bharata race, as also
by such of the citizens of Hastinapore as had come to the place. All of
them, arrived at the sacred river, duly offered oblation of water unto
the high-souled son of Ganga. The goddess Bhagirathi, after those
oblations of water had been offered by them unto her son, rose up from
the stream, weeping and distracted by sorrow. In the midst of her
lamentations, she addressed the Kurus, 'Ye sinless ones, listen to me as
I say unto you all that occurred (with respect to my son). Possessed of
royal conduct and disposition, and endued with wisdom and high birth, my
son was the benefactor of all the seniors of his race. He was devoted to
his sire and was of high vows. He could not be vanquished by even Rama of
Jamadagni's race with his celestial weapons of great energy. Alas, that
hero has been slain by Sikhandin. Ye kings, without doubt, my heart is
made of adamant, for it does not break even at the disappearance of that
son from my sight! At the Self choice at Kasi, he vanquished on a single
car the assembled Kshatriyas and ravished the three princesses (for his
step-brother Vichitravirya)! There was no one on earth that equalled him
in might. Alas, my heart does not break upon hearing the slaughter of
that son of mine by Sikhandin!' The puissant Krishna, hearing the goddess
of the great river indulging in these lamentations consoled her with many
soothing words. Krishna said, 'O amiable one, be comforted. Do not yield
to grief, O thou of beautiful features! Without doubt, thy son has gone
to the highest region of felicity! He was one of the Vasus of great
energy. Through a curse, O thou of beautiful features, he had to take
birth among men. It behoveth thee not to grieve for him. Agreeably to
Kshatriya duties, he was slain by Dhananjaya on the field of battle while
engaged in battle. He has not been slain, O goddess, by Sikhandin. The
very chief of the celestials himself could not slay Bhishma in battle
when he stood with stretched bow in hand. O thou of beautiful face, thy
son has, in felicity, gone to heaven. All the gods assembled together
could not slay him in battle. Do not, therefore, O goddess Ganga, grieve
for that son of Kuru's race. He was one of the Vasus, O goddess! Thy son
has gone to heaven. Let the fever of thy heart be dispelled.'

"Vaisampayana continued, 'That foremost of all rivers, thus addressed by
Krishna and Vyasa, cast off her grief, O great king, and became restored
to equanimity. All the kings there present, headed by Krishna, O monarch,
having honoured that goddess duly, received her permission to depart from
her banks.'"

The end of Anusasana Parva.



FOOTNOTES

1. The commentator explains this passage by the illustration that in the
act of felling a tree the effect is produced by the intermediate act of
raising the axe by some sentient agent, but that in the case of the
burning of a forest, the fire is produced by the friction of the dry
branches of trees without the intervention of any sentient agent.

2. Even as the wind indicates the dry twigs to ignite,' adds the
commentator.

3. Literally, the releaser from bonds.

4. Refers to the curse pronounced on Viswamitra by the son of Vasishtha,
when the former acted as the priest of Trisanku. The curse was that
Viswamitra would partake of canine flesh by officiating as the priest of
one who himself was the partaker of such flesh. It is said that at a time
of great scarcity, Viswamitra was obliged to resort to dog's flesh for
food, and that as he was about to cook it, Indra pounced upon it and took
it away.

5. The constellation of the Great Bear.

6. The Pole Star.

7. Matanga was begotten upon a Brahmana woman by a Sudra father.

8. Charu is properly an oblation or rice, barley, and pulse, boiled with
butter and milk, for presentation to the gods in a sacrifice or ordinary
worship.

9. The meaning seems to be that if Destiny be unfavourable, there need
not be much fear with respect to this world. But if one be wanting in
Exertion, great must his fear be with respect to the next world, for
happiness can never be obtained in the next world unless one acts
righteously while here.

10. The commentator explains that hitam tad vada are understood in the
last line.

11. The commentator explains that the allusion here is to the adage that
swans in drinking milk mixed with water always drink the milk leaving out
the water. Learned Brahmanas are like swans for in discoursing upon even
the topics of the world they select what is good and instructive but
reject what is evil and sinful, or, as the Commentator puts it, they know
the difference between what is soul and what is not soul.

12. Vrijinam is explained by the commentator as 'Sankatam, phalasa iti
yavat' etc.

13. i.e., one should keep oneself aloof from both Energy and Penances,
for both these can consume, if troubled or interfered with. By 'Energy'
is meant both physical and mental force. It belongs to the Kshatriya as
Penances belong to the Brahmana.

14. The commentator thinks that by Krishna, the Island-born Krishna or
Vyasa is meant.

15. The sense is that such a Brahmana, if his expectation be not
gratified, is competent to consume the person that has falsely raised
that expectation.

16. Akshyayyam is fire, because it is fire that eats the food offered to
the Pitris and makes it inexhaustible.

17. The sense is that as a physician cures diverse ailments of the body,
after the same manner, a gratified Brahmana cures diverse faults of the
kingdom in which he continues to live honoured and gratified by the king.

18. Santirishta is the rishti or benefits caused by santi. The
commentator cites Medini for explaining that 'rishti' is 'kshema'.

19. Tapasye is Tapah karishye. There being no indirect narration in
Sanskrit, such forms cannot be helped. A Kulapati is an ascetic that owns
ten thousand ascetics for his disciples, Kanwa, the foster-father of
Sakuntala, was a Kulapati.

20. i.e. renouncing service which is the duty ordained for person of his
order, he desired to betake himself to universal Renunciation or Sanyasa,
without, however, the lingam or marks of that vow.

21. Sankalpa-niyamopetah means Sankalpasya nigraha, of chittavritti
nirodha; tena upetah.

22. No Brahmana, the scriptures declare, should ever assist a Sudra in
the performance of his religious or Pitri rites. Those Brahmanas that
violate this injunction fall away from their superior position. They are
condemned as Sudra-yajins. Here the Rishi, by only giving directions to
the Sudra as to how the Pitri rites were to be performed, became a
Sudra-yajin. There are many families to this day whose status has been
lowered in consequence of such or similar acts of indiscretion on the
part of their ancestors.

23. Atharva Veda Veda cha implies that the Atharvans were not generally
included under the term Veda by which the first three Vedas only were
meant.

24. Punyaha-vachana is a peculiar rite. The priest or some other Brahmana
is invited. Gifts are then made to him, and he utters benedictions in
return upon the giver. Yudhishthira used to invite every day a large
number of Brahmanas and make them very valuable presents for obtaining
their benedictions.

25. Or rather, superior. Guru is used to denote any senior as well as
preceptor.

26. The Diksha is that rite which one passes through by way of
preparation for those sacrifices and vows that one seeks to perform.

27. Satyanrite is equivalent to trade or barter.

28. Sanguptamanoratheshu is explained by the commentator as persons who
conceal their real sentiments by acting differently. The reference is to
hypocrites.

29. Vali (sing. of valayah) means anything offered or dedicated to the
deities. The sense of the second line is that the goddess of prosperity
resides in that house in which flowers are offered to the deities instead
of animal life.

30. The belief is that a man remains childless in consequence of his
sins. If these sins can be washed away, he may be sure to obtain children.

31. I give, in the affirmative form of speech, the three mental acts that
are directed to be avoided. In the original, these are given in the
negative form. Absence of coveting the possessions of others is the act
that is directed to be followed. So compassion for all creatures is
prescribed; and, lastly, the belief is directed to be entertained that
acts have fruits, for the Vedas declare as such. He that does not believe
that acts have fruits disbelieve the very Vedas which of course, is a
sinful act.

32. The sense is this: wealth is always agreeable to all persons but
Vasudeva is more agreeable than wealth. This attribute of being more
agreeable than wealth itself, that is being agreeable to all the
universe,--is due to the favour of Mahadeva. The commentator explains it
in an esoteric sense, coming to the conclusion that arthat
priyataratwancha means the attribute of becoming the Soul of all things
in the universe.

33. The allusion is to Krishna's penances for gratifying Mahadeva in
order to obtain a son. The son so obtained,--that is, as a boon from
Mahadeva, was Pradyumna begotten by Krishna upon Rukmini, his favourite
spouse.

34. It is not necessary to explain these names here. They have been fully
explained in previous portions and will be explained later on in this
very chapter.

35. Such verses are explained by the esoteric school in a different way.
Bhavanam is taken as standing for Hardakasam, i.e., the firmament of the
heart; adityas stand for the senses. The meaning then becomes,--'How can
one that is merely a man comprehend Sambhu whom the senses cannot
comprehend, for Sambhu dwells in the firmament of the heart and cannot be
seen but by the internal vision that Yoga supplies.' Some texts read
'nidhanamadim meaning end and beginning.'

36. It is said that for obtaining a worthy son, Krishna underwent the
austerest of penances on the breast of Himavat, with a view to gratifying
the god Mahadeva. The son obtained as a boon from Mahadeva was Samva, as
would appear from this and the succeeding verses. Elsewhere, however, it
is stated that the son so obtained was Pradyumna begotten upon Rukmini.
The inconsistency would disappear if we suppose that Krishna adored
Mahadeva twice for obtaining sons.

37. Dhava is Anogeissus latifolia. Wall, sin, Conocarpus latifolia Roxb.
Kakubha is otherwise called Arjuna which is identified with Terminalia
Arjuna, syn. Pentaptera Arjuna. Kadamva is Nauclea cadamba, Roxb.
Kuruveka is Barleria cristata, Linn. Ketaka is Pandanus odoratissimus,
Linn. Jamvu is Eugenia Jambolana. Patala is Stereospermum suaveolens syn.
Bignonia suaveolens, Roxb. Varunaka is Crataea, religiosa, syn. Capparis
trifoliata, Roxb. Vatasanabha is Aconitum ferox, Wall. Vilwa is Aegle
Marmelos. Sarala is Pinus longifolia, Roxb. Kapittha is Feronia
Elephantum. Piyala is Buchanania latifolia. Sala is Shorea robusta.
Vadari is Zisyphus jujuba. Kunda is Balanites Roxburghii, Punnaga is
Callophyllum inophyllum. Asoka is Saraca. Indica, Linn, syn Jonesia
Asoka, Roxb. Amra is Mangifera Indica. Kovidara is Bauhinia, accuminata
Linn. Champaka is Michelia Champaka, Linn. Panasa is Artocarpus
integrifolia, Linn.

38. Ganga is represented as the daughter of Rishi Jahnu, and hence is she
known by the name of Jahnavi. What is meant by Jahnavi having been always
represent there is that the goddess always stayed there in spirit,
desirous of conferring merit upon those that would reverence her.

39. i.e., never searching for food but taking what they saw, and never
using their hands also.

40. Graha is literally a planet; here, Mandara who is likened to an evil
planet in consequence of the mischief he did unto all.

41. Yoga in verse 84 is explained by the commentator as meaning the power
of creation. Chandra-Surya-parjanya-prithivyadi-sristi-samarthyam.
Similarly, by Saswatam Valam is meant that power which arises from
Brahmavidya.

42. Surabhi is the celestial cow, the original progenetrix of all kine in
Heaven and on Earth.

43. A Sanyasin is one that bears the stick as the badge of the mode of
life he has adopted. Chatrin is the king. Kundin is one with the
calabash. The meaning is that it is Mahadeva who becomes the Sanyasin or
the mendicant on the one hand and the monarch on the other.

44. Every person belonging to the three superior orders bears the Upavita
or sacred-thread as his badge. The deities also, including Mahadeva, bear
the Upavita. Mahadeva's Upavita is made of living snakes.

45. Arupa is formless, or as the commentator explains, nishkala, i.e.,
without parts, being indivisible. Arupa is of the form of multifarious
acts or operations or effects in the universe. Adyarupa is Hiranyagarbha.

46. The commentator explains that by saying that Maheswara is in the
heart, etc., what is stated is that he is the several cases of which Jiva
is made up while in his unemancipate state, viz., the Annamaya kosha, the
pranamaya kosha, the Manomaya kosha, and the Vijnanmaya kosha. What is
meant by Yogatman is that he is the Soul or essence of Yoga of the
Chidachidgranthi, i.e., the Anandamaya kosha. By Yogasanjnita is meant
that he is Yoga or the Twam padarthah.

47. The meaning seems to be this; the man that is not devoted to Mahadeva
is sure to be subjected to misery. His distress will know no bounds. To
think that such a man has reached the lowest depth of misery only when
from want of food he has to live upon water or air would not be correct.

48. Bhuta-bhavana-Bhavajnam is one acquainted with both the bhavana and
the bhava of all bhutas, i.e., all the living creatures.

49. Without the Srutis, He cannot be comprehended, for he is above all
dialectics or arguments. The object which the Sankhya system has in view,
flows from Him, and the object also which the Yogins have in view has its
origin in Him.

50. Mahadeva, has spoken of as Brahma, first filled Space with his
energy. Space forming, as it were, the material with which everything
else was created. Having filled Space as it were with creative energy, he
created the primeval egg and placed Brahma or the Grandsire of the
universe within it.

51. Tanmatras are the subtile elements, those which we perceive being
gross ones.

52. Here Mahadeva is represented as Supreme Brahman. Hence, the Being
that created Brahma, Vishnu, and Rudra, derived his power to create from
Mahadeva. Thus Mahadeva is Unmanifest Brahma.

53. Sampadayitum is aisaryyena samyojayitum. The difficulty lies in the
first line; the ablative is to be taken as yabartha or lyablope.

54. This is an instance of crux; adhipati is a verb of incomplete
predication, implying etya or encountering.

55. Here the compassion of Mahadeva is shown. The commentator explains
that eshu refers to these words; chatanachetanani would include all
animate and inanimate existences. The word adi following implies heaven
and all unseen entities. Avyaktamuktakesa is a periphrasis for jiva;
avyaktam aspashtam yathasyattatha muktah bhanti tirohitam
nitya-muktatwama sya is the explanation offered. This is, no doubt
correct. The sense then is that all this has flowed from Maheswara and
exists for being enjoyed by Jiva.

56. The allusion is thus explained by the commentator; once upon a time
the seed of Mahadeva fell upon a blazing fire. The deity of fire removed
it, unable to consume it. The seed, however, thus removed became
converted into a mountain of gold. Haimagiri is not Himavat or the
mountains of Himalayas as the Burdwan translation wrongly renders it.

57. Ardhe sthita kanta refers to the transformation of Mahadeva into a
form half of which was male and half female, the male half being the half
of his own usual form, and the female half the form of his dear spouse
Uma or Parvati. This transformation is known by the name of Haragauri.

58. The associates of Mahadeva are called Gana. Deva is in the vocative
case. The Burdwan translator wrongly takes deva-ganah as a compound word
and makes a mess of the meaning.

59. The Bombay reading is Vihitam karanam param. The commentator adopts
it, and explains it as vihitam, ajnatam sat jnapitam; param karanam
avyaktasyapi karanam. The Bengal reading, however, is not faulty.

60. The Bengal reading karmayoga is vicious. The Bombay text reads
karmayajna which, of course, is correct. By karmayajna is meant that
sacrifice which is performed with the aid of actual offerings of flowers
and herbs and animals and libations of ghee, meat, etc. These are opposed
to mental sacrifices or manasa yajna. It is curious to see that the
Burdwan translator adheres to the vicious reading and misunderstands the
meaning. Mahadeva transcends the fruits of action, i.e., he has no body
unto which happiness and misery may attach.

61. The Bombay reading savikara-nirguna-ganam is correct. Then Bengal
reading having gunam (and not ganam) as the last word of this compound,
is vicious. The Burdwan translator adheres to the vicious reading and
wrongly renders the compound. K. P. Singha skips over it. Of course,
ganam means sum or total. Rectodbhavam is arsha for Retasodbhavam.

62. Mahadeva's body is half male and half female. The male half has
garlands of bones, the female half garlands of flowers. The male half has
everything that is rejected by others; the female half has all things
that are coveted by others. This particular form of Mahadeva is called
Hara-Gauri.

63. Girimala is explained by the commentator as one that sports on hills
and mountains.

64. All the texts have Bhavaghnaya. The correct reading, however, seems
to be Bhagaghnaya, especially as the reference to Andhaka occurs
immediately after.

65. Vishnu means here the foremost of sacrifices.

66. These articles must be offered to a visitor, whether he stands in
need of them or not.

67. All the texts read Kshirodasagaraschaiva. The correct reading is
Kshirodasagarasyaiva. The nominative may be construed with the previous
line, but the genitive would be better.

68. The commentator does not explain what is meant by,
Vidyunmalagavakshakam. The word go means the Thunder-fire. Very probably,
what is implied is that flashes of lightning and the Thunder-fire looked
like eyes set upon that cloud. Go may also mean jyoti or effulgence.

69. Tadarpani is explained by the commentator as Twatsarupasyaprapika.

70. Kriti is Kriya, i.e., all acts that creatures do. Vikara is the
fruits of kriya, i.e., joy or sorrow that creatures enjoy or endure. The
Bengal texts read pralaya. The Bombay reading is pranaya. The latter is
also the reading that the commentator notices, but when he explains it to
mean tadabhavah, i.e., the absence of joy and sorrow, I think, through
the scribe's mistake, the l has been changed into the palatal n.
Prabhavah is explained as aiswaryya. Saswata is eternal, i.e.,
transcending the influence of acts.

71. Thou art the adi of the ganas. By ganas is meant ganayante
sankhyayante iti ganah, i.e., tattwah.

72. The commentator explains this by saying that thou art the heavenly
felicity which creatures earn by means of their righteous acts. Acts,
again, are performed in course of Time whose divisions are caused by the
Sun.

73. It has been explained in previous Sections that by success in Yoga
one may make oneself as subtile as possible or as gross as possible. One
may also attain to the fruition of all desires, extending to the very
creation of worlds upon worlds peopled with all kinds of creatures. That
Yogins do not create is due to their respect for the Grandsire and their
wish not to disturb the ordinary course of things.

74. Satyasandhah is the Bengal reading. The Bombay reading is
satrasatwah, meaning, as the commentator explains, satya-sankalpah.

75. Vigraham is explained by the commentator as
visishthanubhanbhava-rupam or nishkalam jnaptimatram.

76. In verse 369 ante Upamanyu says that Krishna is to receive from
Mahadeva sixteen and eight boons. The commentator, stretching the words
has tried to explain them as signifying a total of eight, and eight i.e.,
eight are to be obtained from Mahadeva, and eight from his divine spouse
Uma. The language, however, is such that this meaning cannot be put upon
it without doing violence to it.

77. The commentator explains this as 'thou art the cleanser of all
cleansing entities, i.e., it is in consequence of thee, Ganga and the
others have received the power of cleansing other things and creatures.

78. Adhyatma: that occupies the inner body. Adhibhuta: elements., prima,
eyes, ears, etc.; Adhidaivata: sun, moon, etc. that control over the
bhutas. Adhiloka--one occupying the lokas; Adhivijnana--one occupying the
plane of consciousness; Adhiyajna--one conducting the sacrifices residing
in the heart of the jivas.

79. i.e., they attain to Emancipation when they behold thee in the
firmament of their own hearts, or succeed in identifying their own souls
with thee.

80. The guha or cave in which Brahman is concealed is the heart of every
living creature.

81. The worlds or regions commonly enumerated are Bhu, Bhuva, Swa, Maha,
Jana, Tapa, and Satya. The eight well-known forms of Mahadeva are Water,
Fire, Hotri, Sun, Moon, Space, Earth and Wind. In his form of water he is
called Bhava; in that of fire, he is called Rudra; in that of Hotri he is
called Pasupati; in that of the Sun, he is called Isana, in that of the
Moon, he is called Mahadeva; in that of Space, he is called Bhima; in
that of Earth, he is called Sarva; and in that of wind, he is called
Ugra. Compare the benediction in Kalidasa's Shakuntalam.

82. The cave in which Mahadeva has been concealed is the cave of the
Scriptures: probably, difficult texts.

83. The sense is that these persons have not to make any extraordinary
efforts for beholding thee. Their devotion is sufficient to induce thee
to show thyself unto them.

84. Devayana and Pitriyana are the two courses or paths by which the
departed have to attain to their ends. Those going by the former reach
the Sun; while those that go by the latter reach the Moon.

85. The first is that which is according to the rites inculcated in the
Srutis; second is according to the procedure laid down in the Smritis,
and the third is the way or manner constituted by Dhyana or meditation.

86. Vide Sankhya karika. With original Prakriti, the seven beginning with
Mahat and Ahankara and numbering the five Tanmatras.

87. Both the vernacular translators render the last verse most
erroneously. K.P. Singha skips over every difficulty. In the Anusasana,
this characteristic of his is more marked than in the Santi. The Burdwan
translators very rarely skip over a verse, but they are very generally in
the wrong. Nilakantha explains that Devesah is Brahma. The meaning,
therefore, is that Tandi said unto me those secret names which Brahma had
applied unto the high-souled one or Mahadeva. The Bengal reading Devesa,
in the vocative, is incorrect.

88. i.e., if recited, it destroys all fear or Rakshasas, for these either
fly away at its sound or are even killed.

89. i.e., it has the merit that is attached to either Meditation or Yoga.

90. Both Sthira and Sthanu imply immutability or freedom from change.

91. The commentator explains that Bhava is here used in the sense of that
from which all things now and into which all things merge when the
universal dissolution comes. Or, it may imply, mere existence, without
reference, that is, to any attribute by which it is capable of being
described or comprehended.

92. i.e., Virat or vast or Infinite.

93. The task of rendering these names is exceedingly difficult. In the
original, many of these names are such that they are capable of more than
one interpretation. The commentator often suggests more than one meaning.
Each name would require a separate note for explaining all its bearings.
Niyata is literally one who is observant of fasts and vows and who has
restrained his senses. Hence it means an ascetic. Mahadeva is an ascetic.
Smasanu is either a crematorium, the place where dead creatures lie down,
or, it may mean Varanasi, the sacred city of Siva, where creatures dying
have not to take rebirth. Siva is both a resident of crematoria and of
Varanasi.

94. Or, the universe is displayed in thee.

95. Probably, what is said here is that Mahadeva is the Pratyag Soul free
from ignorance.

96. By Niyama is meant purity both internal and external, contentedness,
with whatever is got, penances, Vedic studies, meditation on the Deity,
etc.

97. Nidhi implies the largest number that can be named in Arithmetical
notation. Hence, it implies, as the commentator correctly explains, the
possessor of inexhaustible felicity and gladness.

98. Sahasraksha is either Indra or possessor of innumerable eyes in
consequence of Mahadeva's being identical with the universe. Visalaksha
is one whose eyes are of vast power, because the Past and the Future are
seen by them even as the Present. Soma implies either the Moon or the
juice of the Soma i.e. the libations poured in the sacrificial fire. All
righteous persons, again, become luminaries in the firmament. It is
Mahadeva that makes them so i.e., he is the giver of glorious forms to
those that deserve them.

99. Many of these names require comments to be intelligible. Ketu is no
plant but Hindu astronomers name the descending node of the Moon by that
name. Hence Rahu is the ascending node of the Moon. Graha, is that which
seizes; Grahapati is Mangala, so called for its malevolence, Varah is
Vrihaspati or Jupiter, who is the counterself of Sukra or Venus. In Hindu
mythology, Sukra is a male person, the preceptor of the Daityas and
Asuras. Atri is Vudha or Mercury, represented as the sons of Atri.
Atryahnamaskarta is Durvasas who was the son of Atri's wife, got by the
lady through a boon of Mahadeva. Daksha's Sacrifice sought to fly away
from Siva, but the latter pursued it and shot his arrow at it for
destroying it downright.

100. Suvarna-retas is explained by the commentator as follows: At first
he created water and then cast his seed into it. That seed became a
golden egg. It may also mean that Mahadeva is Agni or the deity of fire,
for gold represents the seed of Agni.

101. The sense is this: Jiva carries that seed of acts, i.e., Ignorance
and Desire, with him. In consequence of this seed, Jiva travels from one
world into another ceaselessly. This seed, therefore, is the conveyance
or the means of locomotion of Jiva. Mahadeva is Jiva. The soul is called
the rider, and the body is the car that bears the Soul on it.

102. Ganapati is Ganesa, the eldest son of Mahadeva. The Ganas are mighty
beings that wait upon Mahadeva. This make up the first hundred names. The
commentator takes Avala and Gana together.

103. Digvasas means nude. The Puranas say that for stupefying the wives
of certain ascetics, Mahadeva became nude on one occasion. The real
meaning, however, is that he is capable of covering and does actually
cover even infinite space. In the sense of nude, the word means one that
has empty space for his cover or vestments.

104. The meaning is that with thee Knowledge is penance instead of actual
physical austerities being so. This is only another way of saying that
thou hast Jnanamayam Tapah.

105. Sataghni a killer of hundred; Wilson thinks it was a kind of rocket.

106. Harikesa means one having the senses for one's rays, i.e., one who
displays all objects before the soul through the doors of the senses. The
meaning is that Mahadeva is he through whose puissance the mind succeeds
in acquiring knowledge through the senses.

107. Krishna is explained by the commentator thus. Krish is a word
signifying Bhu or Existence. The letter n (the palatal one) signifies
nivritti. Hence Krishna is anandatanmatra.

108. Kaparddin is thus explained by the commentator Kam Jalam pivati iti
kapah. So called because of the incident noted in the text, for the
matted locks of Mahadeva had sucked up the river Ganga when it first fell
from heaven. Then Rit means sovereignty or lordship. Riddah is one that
gives sovereignty. Combining the two, the compound Kaparddin is formed.

109. Nabhah means space which implies puissance. That Nabhah is the
sthala or abode of Mahadeva. The Bengal texts which read Nabhastala are
vicious.

110. The deities are said to move about during the day, while the Asuras
and Rakshasas during the night. What is said, therefore, here is that
thou art the deities and thou art their foes of the Daityas and others.

111. Sound, only when manifested, becomes perceptible. When unmanifest
and lying in the womb of eternal space, it is believed to have an
existence. Unmanifest Brahman is frequently represented as anahatah
savdah or unstruck sound.

112. These four ways are as enumerated by commentator, Visva, Taijasa,
Prajna, Sivadhyana.

113. It may also mean that thou art he called Buddha who preached against
all sacrifices.

114. The commentator explains that Mahadeva's defeat at the hands of
Krishna in the city of Vana was due to Mahadeva's kindness for Krishna,
even as Krishna broke his own vow of never taking up arms in the battle
of Kurukshetra, for honouring his worshipper Bhishma who had vowed that
he would compel Krishna to take up arms.

115. The sense is this: when the universal destruction cones and all
becomes a mighty expanse of water, there appears a banian tree under
whose shade the immortal Rishi Markandeya sees a boy who is Mahavishnu.

116. It may also mean that thou art he at whose approach all the Daitya
troops fled in all directions.

117. i.e., thou art Time itself. This is the implication.

118. By these three names what is indicated is that Mahadeva is a
householder, it Sanyasin and a forest-recluse. House-holders bear a tuft
of hair on their heads, Sanyasins have bald heads, while forest recluses
or Vanaprasthis have matted locks.

119. The sense is that Brahman is felt by every one in the firmament of
his own heart. Mahadeva, as identical with Brahman is displayed in the
heart that is within the physical case. Hence, he may be said to take
birth or appear in his effulgence within every one's body.

120. Kalakatankatah is explained by the commentator as follows:--Kala is
Yama. He is covered over with the illusion of the Supreme Deity. This all
covering illusion, again, has the Supreme Deity for its cover. Thou art
that Supreme Deity.

121. Vibhaga and Sarvaga, the commentator explains, are used for
indicating that thou art the universe as Vyashti and Samashti.

122. Some editions read susaranab, meaning thou art he who well protects
the universe.

123. The golden mail being the illusion of the Supreme Deity in
consequence of which the universe has become displayed.

124. Thou art Pasupati; atodyah pratodanarhah pasavah yasya iti.

125. The commentator explains that Tarangavit, which is literally
conversant with waves means one that is acquainted with the joys or
pleasures that arise from the possession or enjoyment of worldly things,
for such joys may truly be likened to waves which appear and disappear on
the bosom of the sea or ocean of Eternity.

126. The commentator explains that the binder of Asura chiefs refers to
the Supreme Deity's form of Vishnu in which he had bound Vali, the chief
of the Asuras. The plural form has reference to successive Kalpas.

127. The sense is that thou art he that is well conversant with the
ritual of sacrifices.

128. Or, it may mean that thou art he that has no vestments, for no
vestments can cover thy vast limbs.

129. Those that uphold others are, for example, the elephants that stand
at the different points of the compass, the snake Sesha, etc. What is
said here is that thou art the best of all these or all such beings.

130. The sense is that thou art Vishnu who is the foremost of the
celestials and thou art Agni who is the lowest of the celestials; i.e.,
thou art all the celestials.

131. The body is as it were a pit into which the soul falls, determined
by Desire and Ignorance.

132. Vasu, the commentator explains, indicates the Wind, for it means
that which establishes all things into itself.

133. Nisachara is one acting through nisa, or Avidya, i.e., one who
enjoys all objects, implying Jiva invested with Ignorance.

134. The Soul can view the Soul or itself, if it can transcend the body
with the aid of Yoga.

135. The commentator explains that the first word means that thou art
Hansa and that the second word means thou art Paramahansa.

136. Varhaspatya is a word that is applied to a priest. The deities first
got their priest for assisting them at their sacrifices. Human beings
then got theirs. Those born after Vrihaspati are Vrihaspatyas.

137. This word Nandivardhanah may also mean he that withdraws or takes
away the joys previously conferred.

138. The language of the Veda is divine. That of the scriptures is human.

139. Literally, crown of the head.

140. i.e., that succeeds in effecting his Emancipation.

141. Mahanakha refers to the incarnation of Narasingha or the Man-lion
assumed for slaying the Daitya Hiranyakasipu, the father of Prahlada.
Maharoman has reference to the form of the mighty or vast Boar that the
Supreme Deity assumed for raising the submerged Earth on his tusks.

142. Mahamuni may mean either one that is very mananasilah or one that is
exceedingly taciturn.

143. How the world has been likened to a tree has been explained in the
Moksha sections of the Santi Parvan.

144. This is explained in the sense of no one being able to enquire after
Brahman unless he has a body, however subtile, with the necessary senses
and understanding. It may also mean that the tree of the world furnishes
evidence of the existence of the Supreme Deity.

145. Both the vernacular translators have rendered many of these names
most carelessly. The Burdwan translator takes Yaju as one name and
Padabhuja as another. This is very absurd.

146. These are the ten previously enumerated, beginning with residence in
the mother's womb and ending with death as the tenth, with heaven the
eleventh and Emancipation the twelfth.

147. It should be remembered that Kali which is either the age of
sinfulness or the presiding deity of that age and, therefore, a
malevolent one, is highly propitious to Emancipation. The world being
generally sinful, those who succeed in living righteously in this age or
under the sway of this malevolent deity, very quickly attain to heaven if
heaven be their object, or Emancipation if they strive for Emancipation.

148. Implying that thou assumest the form of the constellation called the
Great Bear, and moving onward in space causest the lapse of Time. This
constellation, in Hindu astronomy, is known by the name of Sisumara
because of its resemblance with the form of a tortoise.

149. The word bhashma, meaning ashes, literally signifies anything that
dispels, tears off all bonds, and cures every disease. Ashes are used by
Sanyasins for rubbing their bodies as a mark of their having consumed
every sin and cut off every bond and freed themselves from all diseases.

150. Mahadeva gave a quantity of ashes to his devotees for protecting
them from sin.

151. Vide the story of Mankanaka. The Rishi of that name, beholding
vegetable juice issuing from his body, began to dance in joy. The whole
universe, overpowered by a sympathetic influence, began to dance with
him. At this, for protecting the universe, Mahadeva showed himself to
Mankanaka and, pressing his fingers, brought out a quantity of ashes,
thus showing that his body was made of ashes.

152. Anukari literally means an accessory. In the form of Vishnu or
Krishna, the Supreme Deity addrest himself to aid Arjuna in slaying
Bhishma.

153. As Krishna the friend of Arjuna.

154. In the Pauranik myth, the Earth is described as being supported in
empty space by a mighty snake called Sesha. Mahadeva is that Sesha,
otherwise called Ananta.

155. i.e., Mahavishnu, from whose navel arose the primeval lotus within
which was born Brahma.

156. The Bombay text has a misprint. It reads Punya-chanchu for
Punya-chunchu. In printing the commentary also, the well-known
grammatical Sutra vrittanschanchu etc. The Burdwan translator repeats the
misprint in his rendering. K. P. Singha avoids it.

157. The word Kurukshetra or its abbreviation Kuru means the field or
department of action. It means also the actual field, so called, on which
king Kuru performed his penances, and which is so sacred that its very
dust cleanses a person of all sins.

158. The commentator explains that Siddharthah means Siddhantah, and that
the following compound is its adjective.

159. Literally, the Soul of real existence.

160. People eat off plates of silver or gold or of other metals. Mahadeva
has for his plate Kala or destroyer of the universe. Both the vernacular
translators have erred in rendering this word. K. P. Singha takes the
compound as really consisting of two names, etc.

161. The sense is that Mahadeva is the foremost of Sadhakas or
worshippers engaged in acquiring a particular object, for he has
emaciated or reduced to nothingness all his foes in the form of all
passions good and evil. Prakarshena tanukritah arayah kamadayo yena sah.

162. Narah is thus explained by the commentator.

163. The commentator explains that he who is called Suparvan in heaven is
otherwise called Mahan.

164. Sarva-sahana-samarthya pradah as the commentator explains. Hence, it
means that Mahadeva is he who makes creatures competent to bear all
things, i.e. all griefs and all joys, as also the influence all physical
objects that is quietly borne without life being destroyed.

165. The etymology of Hara is thus explained by the commentator; Hanti
iti ha sulah; tam rati or adatte. This is very fanciful.

166. The sense is this: a nipana is a shallow pond or ditch where cattle
drink. The very oceans are the nipanas or Mahadeva.

167. The commentator thinks that this has reference to the incarnation of
Trivikrama i.e., the dwarf suddenly expanding his form till with two
steps he covered Heaven and Earth and demanded space for his third step.

168. i.e., thou art possessed of Yoga knowledge.

169. The two together form one name.

170. These are Vija, Sakti, and Kilakani. A kakud is a hump or elevated
place in the body.

171. The thin bamboo rod in the hand of the Brahmana is mightier than the
thunderbolt of Indra. The thunder scorches all existing objects upon
which it falls. The Brahmana's rod (which symbolizes the Brahmana's might
in the form of his curse) blasts even unborn generations. The might of
the rod is derived from Mahadeva.

172. Sayambhuvah Tigmatejah is one name. The commentator explains that
Brahman could not look at Mahadeva; hence this reference to his prowess.

173. Brahma, after his birth within the primeval lotus, became desirous
of seeing the end of the stalk of that lotus. He went on and on, without
succeeding to find what he sought. The meaning of the word, therefore, by
implication is that Mahadeva is infinite.

174. Once Brahma asked Surabhi to bear evidence before Vishnu to the
statement that Brahma has seen the foremost part of Siva. Surabhi having
given false evidence out of fear for Brahma was cursed by Siva that her
offspring will eat unholy substances.

175. Uma is another name for Brahmavidya.

176. Falling from the celestial regions, the river Ganga was held by
Mahadeva on his head, among his matted locks. At the earnest
solicitations of King Bhagiratha he gave her out so that flowing along
the surface of the Earth she met the ocean, first passing over the spot
where the ashes of Bhagiratha's ancestors, the sixty thousand sons of
king Sagara of the solar race, lay.

177. This form is called Hara-Gauri, as explained before.

178. Some texts read Pritatma, implying one of contented soul. The
reading noticed by the commentator is Pitatma, meaning gold-complexioned.
The Burdwan translator takes Pritatma as one name. This is not correct.

179. Mahadeva is represented as possessed of five heads, four on four
sides and one above.

180. Amritogovrisherwarah is one name.

181. These are names for different portions of time.

182. The Srutis declare that Fire is his head, the Sun and the Moon are
his eyes, etc.

183. Mahadeva has an image in the country of the Kalingas that is called
Vyaghreswara.

184. Kantah is thus explained. Kasya Sukhasya antah sima.

185. Undivided, i.e., having nothing else for its object, Sarva-bhavatah
is bhagvat. The sense is that unless one becomes conversant with all the
modes of worshipping Bhava, i.e., in thought, word and deed, and unless
one has special good luck, one cannot have such devotion to Bhava.

186. There are numerous instances of the gods having become alarmed at
the penances of men and done their best to nullify those penances by
despatching celestial nymphs for attracting them of carnal pleasures.

187. I expand this verse a little for bringing out the sense clearly.

188. The subject propounded by Yudhishthira is this: marriage is always
spoken of as a union of the sexes for practising all religious duties
together. The king asks, how can this be. Marriage, as seems to him, is a
union sought for pleasure. If it be said that the two individuals married
together are married for practising religious duties jointly, such
practice is suspended by death. Persons act differently and attain to
different ends. There is, therefore, no prospect of a reunion after
death. When, again, one of them dies, the joint practice of duties can no
longer take place. The other objections, urged by Yudhishthira, to the
theory of marriage being a union of the sexes for only practising
religious duties jointly, are plain.

189. The sense is that if after returning from thy journey to that region
thou claimest thy bride, thou mayst obtain her from me. Thy journey will
be a sort of trial or test to which I mean to put thee.

190. Kala-ratri is the Night that precedes the universal dissolution.

191. The commentator thinks that uttaram means the sacred north.

192. Tirtha means here a Ghat, i.e., an easy descent from the bank for
access to the water.

193. Pradhanatah is explained by the commentator to mean with foremost of
Vedic mantras.

194. Mandakini is that part of the river Ganga which flows through
Kailasa, while Nalini is a celebrated lake owned by the king of the
Yakshas, so called because of the lotuses which occur there in plenty.

195. Divya is excellent Gandharva, meaning music and dance.

196. A woman is said to destroy a family by staining it with her
unchastity.

197. Both the vernacular translators have totally misunderstood the
second line. Asyatam is explained by the commentator as tushnim
sthiyatam. Ruchitahchcchandah means chcchandah or yearning arises from
ruchi or like. What the Rishi says is Asyet I do not yearn after thy
company, for I do not like thee. Of course, if, after staying with thee
for some time, I begin to like thee, I may then feel a yearning for thee!

198. Utsaditah is explained by the commentator to mean chalitah. Here,
however, I think it does not mean so.

199. 'The last words may also mean--'Go to thy own bed and rest by
thyself!'

200. The commentator takes the words kimivottaram bhavet to imply what
will be better for me? Shall I adhere to Vadanya's daughter or shall I
take this girl? I think this is rather far-fetched.

201. By Sakti is implied kamadidamanasamarthyam and by dhriti
purvapraptasya atyagah. The last half of the last line of verse 25 is
rendered erroneously by both the vernacular translators. Adhering to the
commentator's explanation, they add their own interpretation which is
different. This sort of jumble is very peculiar.

202. Linga means signs or indications. A Lingin is one that bears signs
and indications. Brahmanam (in both places) means one conversant with
Brahman. The first, that is, Lingin implies either a Brahmacharin or a
Sanyasin that always bears the marks of his order. An Alingin is one that
is divested of such marks. Yudhishthira's question is, who, amongst
these, should be considered worthy of gifts?

203. The sense is that with respect to acts having reference to only the
Pitris the conduct and competence of Brahmanas should be examined.

204. The commentator explains that five persons are mentioned in the
question of Yudhishthira, K. P. Singha omits one. The Burdwan translator
repeats the words of the original without any explanation. I take
sambandhi to mean relatives by marriage. To this day, in all India,
people make gifts or presents unto sons-in-law, etc.

205. The sense is that no sin can touch a Brahmana who observes these
three acts. These three acts are efficacious in washing away all sins.
The commentator points out that by this the attributes of birth and
knowledge are referred to.

206. By good conduct is implied modesty and candour.

207. Anekantam is explained by the commentator as Anekaphalakaram, i.e.,
of diverse kinds of fruits. The fruits attainable by a correct discharge
of duties are of diverse kinds, because the objects of those duties,
called Palms are of various kinds.

208. Verse 22 contains 4 substantives in the genitive plural. All those
are connected with vishtham in the previous verse. The commentator points
out this clearly. Those living in the outskirts of towns and villages are
tanners and other low castes. They who publish the acts and omissions of
others are regarded as very vile persons, equivalent to such low caste
men mentioned above. It is difficult to differ from the commentator, but
it seems that genitives in the verse as are used for datives, in which
case the meaning would be that they who give unto such persons shall also
sink into hell. The Burdwan translator gives a ridiculous version of
verse 22.

209. The Bengal reading Brahmacharyya is better than the Bombay reading
of that word in the accusative. Bhishma apparently gives two answers.
These however involve three. By maryyada is meant boundaries or limits.
The duties of men have known bounds. To transgress those bounds would be
to transgress duty. The highest indication of Righteousness is samah or
absence of desire for all worldly objects; hence Renunciation.

210. i.e., by making gifts unto even a single such Brahmana, one rescues
all the ancestors and descendants of one's race.

211. One makes gifts unto the deities, the Pitris, and unto human beings.
There is a time for each kind of gift. If made untimely, the gift,
instead of producing any merit, becomes entirely futile, if not sinful.
Untimely gifts are appropriated by Rakshasas. Even food that is taken
untimely, does not strengthen the body but goes to nourish the Rakshasas
and other evil beings.

212. i.e., any food, a portion of which has been eaten by any of these
persons, is unworthy of being given away. If given, it is appropriated by
Rakshasas. One incompetent to utter Om is, of course, a Sudra.

213. The speaker, by first mentioning who are unworthy, means to point
out those that are worthy.

214. Apasmara is a peculiar kind of epilepsy in which the victim always
thinks that he is pursued by some monster who is before his eyes. When
epilepsy is accompanied by some delusion of the sensorium, it comes to be
called by Hindu physicians as Apasmara.

215. An Agrani or Agradani is that Brahmana unto whom the food and other
offerings to the Preta in the first Sraddha are given away. Such a person
is regarded as fallen.

216. When corpses are taken to crematoria, certain rites have to be
performed upon them before they can be consumed. Those Brahmanas that
assist at the performance of those rites are regarded as fallen.

217. Sometimes the father of a daughter bestows her upon a bridegroom
under the contract that the son born of that daughter by her husband
should be the son of the daughter's father. Such a son, who is
dissociated from the race of his own father, is called a Putrika-putra.

218. Anugraham is that merit in consequence of which faults become
neutralised and the stained person may come to be regarded as deserving.

219. As Drona, Aswatthaman, Kripa, Rama and others.

220. Uditastamita means one who having earned wealth spends it all in
gifts. Astamitodita is one who though poor at first succeed in earning
wealth afterwards; i.e., one who having become rich, keeps that wealth
for spending it on good purposes.

221. Upon the completion of a Sraddha, the Brahmana who is officiating at
it should utter the words yukta which means well-applied. Certain other
words such as Swadha, etc., have to be uttered. The meaning is that the
Brahmana who assists the performer of the Sraddha by reciting the Mantras
should, upon completion, say unto the performer that the Sraddha is
well-performed. As the custom is, these words are still uttered by every
Brahmana officiating at Sraddhas.

222. K. P. Singha wrongly renders the word somakshayah as equivalent to
somarasah.

223. Upon the conclusion of a Sraddha or other rites, the Brahmana who
officiates at it, addresses certain other Brahmanas that are invited on
the occasion and says,--Do you say Punyaham--The Brahmana addressed
say,--Om, let it be Punyaham!--By Punyaham is meant sacred day.

224. The fact is, the slaughter of animals in a sacrifice leads to no sin
but if slaughtered for nothing (i.e., for purposes of food only), such
slaughter leads to sin.

225. One is said to become impure when a birth or a death occurs among
one's cognates of near degree. The period of impurity varies from one day
to ten days in case of Brahmanas. Other periods have been prescribed for
the other orders. During the period of impurity one cannot perform one's
daily acts of worship, etc.

226. In this country, to this day, there are many persons that go about
begging, stating that they desire to go to Banaras or other places of the
kind. Sometimes alms are sought on the ground of enabling the seeker to
invest his son with the sacred thread or perform his father's Sraddha,
etc. The Rishi declares such practices to be sinful.

227. Literally that are afraid of thieves and others. The sense, of
course, is that have suffered at the hands of thieves and others and are
still trembling with fear.

228. The two exceptions have been much animadverted upon by unthinking
persons. I have shown that according to the code of morality, that is in
vogue among people whose Christianity and civilisation are
unquestionable, a lie may sometimes be honourable. However casuists may
argue, the world is agreed that a lie for saving life and even property
under certain circumstances, and for screening the honour of a confiding
woman, is not inexcusable. The goldsmith's son who died with a lie on his
lips for saving the Prince Chevalier did a meritorious act. The owner
also who hides his property from robbers, cannot be regarded as acting
dishonourably.

229. By selling the Vedas is meant the charging of fees for teaching
them. As regards the Vedas, the injunction in the scriptures is to commit
them to memory and impart them from mouth to mouth. Hence to reduce them
into writing was regarded as a transgression.

230. In this country to this day, the act of marrying a helpless person
with a good girl by paying all the expenses of the marriage, is regarded
as an act of righteousness. Of course, the man that is so married is also
given sufficient property for enabling him to maintain himself and his
wife.

231. Articles needed in marriages are, of course, girls and ornaments.

232. Vapra has various meanings. I think, it means here a field. Large
waste lands often require to be enclosed with ditches and causeways.
Unless so reclaimed, they cannot be fit for cultivation.

233. The river Chenab in the Punjab was known in former times by the name
of Chandrabhaga. So the river Jhelum was known by the name of Vitasta.

234. The sense is that one proceeds to the region of the Apsaras and
becomes an object of respect there.

235. i.e., one acquires sovereignty.

236. It is difficult to understand the connection of the second line of
verse 31. It does not mean enters the eternal region called Andhaka that
rests on nothing. Human sacrifices were performed sometimes in former
days.

237. Nyastani has Gangayam understood after it.

238. The deities are supported by the offerings made in sacrifices. These
offerings consist of the productions of the Earth and the butter produced
by the cow. The deities, therefore, are said to be chiefly supported by
the Earth and the Cow. The Asuras, by afflicting the Earth and killing
kine, used to weaken the deities.

239. The river Ganga has three courses. On Earth it is called Bhagirathi
or Ganga; in heaven it is called Mandakini; and in the nether regions it
is known by the name of Bhogabati.

240. Devesh is lit. the lord of the deities; but here it means the King
or Emperor.

241. Aranyaih is explained by the commentator as implying courses of
conduct leading to Brahmaloka.

242. The story referred to is this: King Sagara of the solar (?) race had
sixty thousand sons, all of whom were reduced to ashes by the curse of
Kapila. Afterwards Bhagiratha, a prince of the same race, brought down
Ganga from heaven for their redemption.

243. Identical with the universe because capable of conferring the
fruition of every wish. Vrihati--literally, large or vast, is explained
by the commentator as implying foremost or superior.

244. Madhumatim is explained as conferring the fruits of all good actions.

245. Viswam avanti iti. Here the absence of num is arsha.

246. Bhuvanasya is swargasya.

247. The construction of this verse is not difficult though the order of
the words is a little involved. Both the vernacular translators have
misunderstood it completely.

248. Kurute may mean also makes. The sense is that the Brahmana grants to
others whatever objects are desired by them. In his own case also, he
creates those objects that he himself desires. His puissance is great and
it is through his kindness that others get what they wish or seek.

249. Ekaramah is one who sports with one's own self, i.e., who is not
dependant on others for his joy or happiness; one who has understood the
soul.

250. Dasatirdasa is ten times hundred or one thousand Dasati, like
Saptati, Navati, etc., means ten times ten. Both the Vernacular
translators have erred in rendering the word.

251. Teshu (Brahmaneshu) Vahumanaprah (san) kan namsvasi--this is the
Grammar, as explained by the commentator.

252. Yajanti with reference to truth and righteousness means worship, and
with reference to land kine means give away.

253. Pigeons pick up scattered grains and never store for the morrow. In
the Sila and other vows, the picking up of scattered and cast off grains
from the field after the crops have been taken away by the owners, is
recommended as the means of filling the stomach.

254. The aggregate of three is Righteousness, Wealth, and Pleasure.
Persons who, in all the acts they do, keep an eye upon these three, are
said to have their aggregate of three existing in all their acts.

255. Some texts read vriddhan for Ishtan. If the former reading be
adopted, the meaning would be that kings should worship all aged
Brahmanas possessed of Vedic lore.

256. Though really conversant with all duties, and of righteous
behaviour, the Brahmanas, nevertheless, for concealing their real natures
or for protecting the world, are seen to be employed in diverse kinds of
occupations.

257. The argument, therefore, is that anything given to the Brahmana to
eat and that is eaten by him apparently, is really eaten by these deities.

258. Bhutatmanah is explained by the commentator as Bhuta
praptahvasikritahatma yaih.

259. The second line of verse 18 is a crux. The commentator explains that
prakshipya means dattwa; Kun is the Earth. Van is diptim ukrvan,
ubhaya-loke iti seshah. Para- [This footnote appears to have been
truncated, as the last line begins with a hyphenated word.--JBH.]

260. The dark spots on the Moon were due to the curse of Daksha. The
waters of the Ocean became saltish owing to the curse of a Rishi.

261. The sense is that one becomes a Brahmana by birth alone, without the
aid of those purificatory rites that have been laid down in the
scriptures. When food is cooked, none else than a Brahmana is entitled in
the first portion thereof.

262. The commentator thinks that saudram karma has especial reference to
the service of others. Hence what is interdicted for the Brahmanas is the
service of others.

263. In this country to this day, when food is prepared in view of guests
invited to a house, no portion of such food can be offered to any one
before it is dedicated to the deities and placed before those for whom it
is intended. An exception, however, is made for children. What is stated
here is that a good Brahmana can take the precedence of even children in
the matter of such food.

264. What is stated here is that those Brahmanas that do not accept gifts
are very superior. Their energy and might are great. Bhishma directs
Yudhishthira to be always careful of how he would treat such superior
Brahmanas. After rakshyam, the words swakulam are understood. The Burdwan
translator misunderstands the second line of the verse.

265. The construction is Etat Brahmana-mukhat sastram, yat srutwaiha
pravartate, prithivyam etc, etc. Both the vernacular translators have
misunderstood the verse.

266. Etat karanam seems to refer to Brahamana-mukhat sastram. The sense
seems to be that in the encounter between the deities and the Asuras the
power of the Brahmanas was abundantly proved, for Sukra aided the Asuras
with his Mantras and incantations, while Vrihaspati and others aided the
deities by the same means.

267. In some of the Bengal texts for Bhumiretau the reading Bhumireto
occurs. The fact is, the latter is a misprint or a mere clerical error.
The etau has reference to the two mentioned in the second line. The
Burdwan translator actually takes Bhumireto as a correct reading and
makes nonsense of the verse.

268. I expand this verse. After kriya bhavati patratwam is understood.
Kriya includes the diverse objects for which persons solicit alms or
gifts. Upansuvratam is maunam parivrajyam.

269. It is said that food or other things, when given to an undeserving
person, feels grief. What Yudhishthira asks is who the proper person is
unto whom gifts may be made.

270. All these acts should be performed with purity of intention and
according to the ordinances of the scriptures. For example, sacrifices
should not be performed with vanity or pride. The Vedas should not be
studied without faith. Children should not be procreated from lust, etc.

271. Such words are unseizable and unintelligible for their depth of
meaning. Women are equally unseizable and unintelligible.

272. The sense is this: women agitate the hearts of those that treat them
with respect as of those that treat them with disdain. The commentator
explains that Pujitah dhikkritahva tulyavat vikaram janayati.

273. All living creatures are virtuous, for they are capable of
progressing towards godship by their own acts.

274. Pura has little force here, implying 'first'. In the first place,
know that I have come to thee,

275. Ladies spoke in Prakrita and not in Sanskrit. The latter is refined,
the former is unrefined. Hence Indra's surprise at hearing Sanskrit words
from the lady's lips.

276. The adana ceremony was a rite in course of which friends and kinsmen
had to make presents unto the person performing the ceremony. The
investiture with the sacred-thread, marriage, the rite performed in the
sixth and the ninth month of pregnancy, are all ceremonies of this kind.

277. It would be curious to see how the commentator Nilakantha seeks to
include within these five the eight forms of marriage mentioned by Manu.
The fact is, such parts of the Mahabharata are unquestionably more
ancient than Manu. The mention of Manu is either an instance of
interpolation or there must have been an older Manu upon whose work the
Manu we know has been based. The Asura and the Rakshasa forms are
unequivocally condemned. Yet the commentator seeks to make out that the
Rakshasa form is open to the Kshatriyas. The fact is, the Rakshasa was
sometimes called the Paisacha. The distinction between those two forms
was certainly of later origin.

278. Thus, there was no difference, in status, in ancient times, between
children born of a Brahmana, a Kshatriya or a Vaisya mother. The
difference of status was of later origin.

279. Nagnika is said to be one who wears a single piece of cloth. A girl
in whom the signs of puberty have not appeared does not require more than
a single piece of cloth to cover her. The mention of Nagnika, the
commentator thinks, is due to an interdiction about wedding a girl of
even ten years in whom signs of puberty have appeared.

280. When a father happens to have an only daughter, he frequently
bestows her in marriage upon some eligible youth on the understanding
that the son born of her shall be the son, for purposes of both Sraddha
rites and inheritance, not of the husband begetting him but of the girl's
father. Such a contract would be valid whether expressed or not at the
time of marriage. The mere wish of the girl's father, unexpressed at the
time of marriage, would convert the son into a son not of the father who
begets him but of the father of the girl herself. A daughter reserved for
such a purpose is said to be a putrikadharmini or 'invested with the
character of a son.' To wed such a girl was not honourable. It was in
effect an abandonment of the fruits of marriage. Even if dead at the time
of marriage, still if the father had, while living, cherished such a
wish, that would convert the girl into a putrikadharmini. The repugnance
to wedding girls without father and brothers exists to this day.

281. For understanding the meanings of Sapinda and Sagotra see any work
on Hindu law civil or canonical.

282. These verses are exceedingly terse. The commentator explains that
what is intended is that under the third and fourth circumstances the
giver of the girl incurs no sin; under the second, the bestower of the
girl (upon a person other than he unto whom a promise had been made)
incurs fault. The status of wife, however, cannot attach simply in
consequence of the promise to bestow upon the promiser of the dower. The
relationship of husband and wife arises from actual wedding. For all
that, when the kinsmen meet and say, with due rites, 'This girl is this
one's wife,' the marriage becomes complete. Only the giver incurs sin by
not giving her to the promised person.

283. Hence, having promised to wed such a one, she is at liberty to give
him over and wed another whom she likes.

284. In consequence of that boon no one incurs sin by retracting promises
of bestowing daughters upon others in view of more eligible husbands.

285. Hence, no one should bestow his daughter upon a person that is not
eligible, for the offspring of such marriage can never be good and such a
marriage can never make the daughter's sire or kinsmen happy.

286. One of the most important rites of marriage is the ceremony of
circumambulation. The girl is now borne around the bride-groom by her
kinsmen. Formerly, she used to walk herself. All gifts, again, are made
with water. The fact is, when a thing is given away, the giver, uttering
the formula, sprinkles a drop of water upon it with a blade of Kusa grass.

287. Hence, what Savitri did at the bidding of her sire could not be
against the course of duty or morality. The Burdwan translator has
misunderstood the second line of this verse, while K.P. Singha has
quietly dropped it.

288. Dharmasya refers to the true or correct or eternal Aryan usage,
Pradanam is khandanam, from da, to cut The sense is that the grant of
liberty to women is an Asura practice.

289. Hence, no one should wed, led by desire alone. Nor should the maiden
be permitted to choose for herself. She may be guided in her choice by
improper considerations connected with only carnal pleasure.

290. The property is divided into five parts, two of which are taken by
the daughter under such circumstances and three by the son.

291. I expand the verse for making it intelligible, by setting forth the
reasons urged by Hindu lawyers and noticed by the commentator.

292. Valatah vasyam implies only those whose consent is obtained by
force. Hence, such cases as those of Krishna abducting Rukmini and Arjuna
abducting Subhadra, are excluded from this denunciation.

293. The maiden may herself accept ornaments. That would not convert the
transaction into a sale.

294. Swalpa-kaupinah literally is covered with a small piece of cloth,
hence, capable of being easily seduced.

295. i.e., he should not acquire for storing. He may acquire to spend in
sacrifices and gifts or for maintaining himself and his family.

296. i.e., if the Brahmana, led by affection for any other wife,
disregards the wife belonging to his own order and shows preference for
those of the other orders, he then incurs the liability of being regarded
as a Chandala that has come to be numbered among Brahmanas.

297. The sense of this verse seems to be this: If a Brahmana takes in
succession three spouses all belonging to his own order, the son born of
his first wife shall take the share that is allotted to the eldest; that
born of the second wife shall take a share next in value; and that born
of the youngest wife shall take the share allotted to the youngest. After
such especial shares are taken, the residue of the property is to be
distributed unto equal shares each of which shall be taken by each of the
children. If this interpretation be correct, it would appear that the
contention waged some years ago in Bengal, that the scriptures do not
allow a person the liberty of taking more than one spouse from his own
order, falls to the ground. Upon other grounds also, that contention was
absurd, for Kshatriya kings often took more than one Kshatriya spouse.

298. i.e., each order was created for performing sacrifices. The Sudra is
competent to perform sacrifice. Only his sacrifice should be by serving
the three other orders.

299. For them there is no investiture with the sacred-thread.

300. Broken earthenpots are always cast off. They are some times utilised
by persons of the lower orders.

301. The second line is exceedingly terse. The sense seems to be this:
one who is of low birth must remain low in disposition. Absolute goodness
may arise in his heart, but it disappears immediately without producing
any effect whatsoever. The study of the scriptures, therefore, cannot
raise such a person. On the other hand, the goodness which according to
its measure has ordained for one (1) the status of humanity and (2) the
rank in that status, is seen to manifest itself in his act.

302. The son begotten upon a maiden by one who does not become her
husband, and born after her marriage, is regarded as belonging not to the
begetter but to the husband.

303. Such a son becomes the property of the mother's husband and not of
his begetter. If however, the begetter expresses a wish to have him and
rear him, he should be regarded as the begetter's. The principle upon
which he becomes the child of the mother's husband is that the begetter
conceals himself and never wishes to have him.

304. The objects of Yudhishthira's question will appear clearly from the
answer given to it by Bhishma.

305. There is no fault in kine, etc., and kine are like fire etc. The
Hindu idea is that kine are cleansing or sanctifying. The Rishis
discovered that the magnetism of the cow is something that is possessed
of extraordinary virtues. Give the same kind of food to a cow and a
horse. The horse-dung emits an unhealthy stench, while the cowdung is an
efficacious disinfectant. Western science has not yet turned its
attention to the subject, but there can be little doubt that the urine
and dung of the cow possess untold virtues.

306. Saptopadam mitram means that by speaking only seven words or walking
only seven steps together, two persons, if they be good, become friends.

307. Vajrasuchyagram may also mean furnished with an end like that of the
needle with which diamonds and other hard gems are bored through.

308. The ever-changing beautiful masses of afternoon or evening clouds,
presenting diverse kinds of forms almost every minute, are regarded as
the abodes or mansions of the Gandharvas.

309. Some of these trees and creepers are identifiable. Sahakara is
Mangifera Indica, Linn. Ketaka is a variety of Pandanus Odoratissimus,
Linn. Uddalaka is otherwise called Vahuvara and sometimes Selu. It is the
Cordia Myxa, Linn. It may be a misreading for Uddanaka, which is the
well-known Cirisha or the Mimosa Sirisca of Roxburgh. Dhava is Conocarpus
latifolia, Roxb. Asoka is Saraca Indica, Linn., syn, Jonesia Asoka, Roxb.
Kunda is Jasminum pubescens, Linn. Atimukta is otherwise called Madhavi.
It is Gaertinera racemosa, Roxb. Champaka is Michelia Champaca, Linn.
Tilaka sometimes stands for Lodhra, i.e., Symplocos racemosa, Roxb. The
word is sometimes used for the Aswattha or Ficus religiosa, Linn. Bhavya
is Dillenia Indica, Linn. Panasa is Artocarpus integrifolia, Linn. The
Indian Jack-tree. Vyanjula stands for the Asoka, also Vetasa (Indian
cane), and also for Vakula, i.e., Mimusops Elengi, Linn. Karnikara is
Pterospermum accrifolium, Linn. Cyam#a is sometimes used for the Pilu,
i.e., Salvadora Persica, Linn. Varanapushpa or Nagapushpa or Punnaga is
Colophyllum inophyllum, Linn. Astapadika or padika is otherwise called
Bhardravalli. It is the Vallaris dichotoma, Wall., Syn., Echites
dichotoma, Roxb.

310. Bhringaraja is the Lanius Malabaricus. Kokila is the well-known
Indian Koel or cuckoo. Catapatra is the wood-pecker. Koyashtika is the
Lapwing. Kukkubhas are wild-cocks (Phasinus gallus). Datyuhas are a
variety of Chatakas or Gallinules. Their cry resembles the words
(phatikjal). Jivajivaka is a species of partridges. Chakora is the Greek
partridge. Sarasa is the Indian crane. Chakravaka is the Brahmini duck or
goose.

311. In verse 39 and 40 for asmi and tapacchaitat read asi and tapasaccha.

312. The Grandsire spoke of somebody becoming a Kshatriya in Bhrigu's
race, and referred to the incident as the result of a stain that would be
communicated to that race from Kusika's. This is the full allusion.

313. The sense seems to be that Kusika wishes to know what person of
Bhrigu's race will confer this high benefit upon his race.

314. By ancestors to the seventh degree also descendants to the same
degree are meant.

315. Heaven and Hell are places of only enjoyment and endurance. There
can be no acts there leading to merit or demerit. This world is the only
place which is called the field of acts.

316. Vrikshas are large or small trees generally. Gulma is a shrub, or
bushy plant. Lata is a creeper, which cannot grow without a support.
Talli is of the same variety, with this difference, perhaps, that its
stems are more tree-like than those of creepers. Twaksara is the bamboo.
Trina includes all kinds of grass.

317. The commentator explains that the drift of Yudhishthira's query is
this: the giver and the receiver do not meet in the next world. How then
can an object given away return or find its way back to the giver in the
next world or next life?

318. Abhimanat is differently understood by the commentator.

319. Yuktaih is the better reading, although muktaih may not be
erroneous. Yuktain is charaih; while muktath is 'men charged with a
commission to do a thing'.

320. This sacrifice is the sacrifices of gifts. 'Spreading out a
sacrifice' means 'spreading out the articles and placing them in proper
order in view of the sacrifice.' 'Dadatah vartotam' means datustaya
saryanastu.

321. The sense is this: gifts made to such superior Brahmanas serve to
free a person from the debts which he owes to the deities. The 'water of
gifts' means the water that the giver sprinkles, with a blade of Kusa
grass, over the article given away, saying, 'I give this away'. In the
sacrifice constituted by gifts, such water is like the dedication of
offerings to the Pitris. A knowledge of the ritual of sacrifice is needed
to understand and appreciate the figures employed in such verses.

322. Some texts read tathabham, meaning abhayam or fearlessness is from
them--Tathobhayam (which I adopt) is that both, Heaven and Hell become
one's through them if gratified, they bestow Heaven; if angry, they hurl
into Hell.

323. Yachyam is yachanarupamkarma, Anisasya is daridrasya. Abhiharam is
tirashkaram. Yachanti bhutani means those who beg or solicit. In the
Santi Parva, Bhishma in one place directs beggars to be driven away from
towns and cities as annoyers of respectable people. This, however,
applies to professional beggars, and not persons in real distress.

324. Antarvedyan is within the platform; and Anrisamsyatah is vahirvedyan
or outside the platform.

325. Sacrifices are a means of giving away unto the Brahmanas.

326. Weeping women means women of destitute condition and, therefore,
unable to pay.

327. The first word in the first line is not kshatam but kritam.

328. The Commentator explains that because giver by one that is dear or
given to one that is dear, therefore is she called Priyadatta.

329. This is evidently a crux. Prasamsanti means generally praise. Here
it means reproach or censure. The second line may also mean, his enemies
dare not attack his kingdom.

330. This is the utterance or declaration of the earth herself.

331. Rich with every taste' the idea is that things have six tastes,
viz., sweet, sour, etc. The quality of taste is drawn by things from the
soil or earth. The tastes inhere in earth, for it is the same earth that
produces the sugarcane and the tamarind.

332. Sparsitam is dattam.

333. The Bombay reading adityatastansha is better than the Bengal reading
adityataptansha.

334. What Yudhishthira wishes to know is what conjunctions should be
utilized for making what particular gifts.

335. Payasa is rice boiled in sugared milk. It is a sort of liquid food
that is regarded as very agreeable.

336. Vardhamana, Sarava or Saravika. It is a flat certain cup or dish.

337. Phanita is the inspissated juice of the sugarcane.

338. A prasanga is a basket of bamboo or other material for covering
paddy.

339. Rajamasha is a kind of bean. It is the Vinga sinensis, syn.
Dilicheos sinensis Linn.

340. There may be akama and sakama acts, i.e., acts without desires of
fruit and acts with desires of fruit. A Sraddha with Tila or sesame
should never be done without desire for fruit.

341. When a residential house is given away unto such a Brahmana and the
receiver resides in it, the giver reaps the reward indicated. It does not
refer to the hospitable shelter to such a Brahmana given by one in one's
own house.

342. To this day, in Bengal at least, a tenant never performs the first
Sraddha or a Puja (worship of the deities) without obtaining in the first
instance the permission of the landlord. There is in Sraddhas a
Rajavarana or royal fee payable to the owner of the earth on which the
Sraddha is performed.

343. Tasyam is explained by the commentator as kritayam.

344. Kinasa is either one who tills the soil with the aid of bulls or one
who slays cattle. Having first mentioned vadhartham, kinasa should here
be taken for a tiller. Kasai, meaning butcher, seems to be a corruption
of the word kinasa.

345. One need not dedicate unto one's deities any other food than what
one takes oneself. In the Ramayana it has been said that Rama offered
unto the Pitris astringent fruits while he was in exile. The Pisachas
dedicate carrion unto their deities for they themselves subsist upon
carrion.

346. The first line of 13 and the last line of 14 are very terse: Kalasya
vihitam, as explained by the Commentator, is ayuh pramanam, na prapnami
is na janami. The sense is that 'unurged by rime, I cannot allow these to
take up my residence here.'

347. i.e., invite Brahmanas to feasts in which sesame should predominate.

348. In Bengal, to this day, those who can afford, particularly pious
ladies, establish shady resting places in the month of Vaisakha (the
hottest month of the year), by the side of the public roads, for
travellers, where good cool drinking water, a handfull of well-drenched
oats, and a little of raw sugar, are freely distributed. Such
institutions, on the old Benares Road and the Grand Trunk Road,
considerably refresh travellers. There are miles upon miles along these
roads where good water is not at all procurable.

349. What is meant by the giving of lamps is the placing of lighted lamps
in dark places which are the resorts of men, such as roads and ghats, etc.

350. Of equal name, because the word go means cow, earth, and speech.

351. No particular number is intended. What is meant is--innumerable.

352. The 'hence' in the last line has reference to what has been said
before on the subject of kine, and not to the first line of the verse.

353. Vitasokaih in the instrumental plural refers to Bhavanaih or some
such substantive understood. It may also be react as a nominative plural,
referring to Lokah.

354. Very probably what is said here is that only such kine are worthy of
being given away unto Brahmanas, and not lean animals.

355. Kine produce food not only by assisting at tillage of the soil, but
also by aiding in the performance of sacrifices. The ghee burnt in the
sacrificial fire sustains the under-deities, who pour rain and cause
crops to grow.

356. That heat is the originating principle of the growth of many things
was well understood by the Rishis.

357. The sense seems to be this: in doing all pious acts, one should
first take the aid of a preceptor, even if one be well-conversant with
the ordinances one has to follow. Without the selection of a preceptor in
the first place, there can be no pious act. In the matter, therefore, of
making gifts of kine according to the ordinances laid down, one should
seek the help of a preceptor as well as in the matter of every other act
of piety.

358. When consciousness of body is lost in Yoga or Samadhi, a temporary
Moksha or Emancipation succeeds. Men with cleansed minds behold at such
times those regions of supreme felicity to which the speaker refers. Such
felicity, of course, is the felicity of Brahma itself.

359. Govritti is imitating the cow in the matter of providing for the
morrow. Hence, one, who never thinks of the morrow and never stores
anything for future use, is meant.

360. Etachcha in 25 implies gift of a cow, and enam refers to a Brahmana.
Dwijaya dattwa, etc, in the first line of 26 seems to be an elaboration
of Etachcha.

361. Homyaheth prasute implies for a child born in consequence of a Homa.
The fact is, ascetics sometimes created children without the intervention
of women and by efficacy of the Homa alone. At such times should people
make gifts of kine unto such sires. The mention of Vala-samvriddhaye
afterwards implies the birth of children in the usual course.

362. Kshirapaih implies calves that are yet unweaned; that is, the cow
should be given at such a time when she is still yielding milk; when, in
fact, her calf has not learnt to eat or drink anything besides the milk
or its dam.

363. The correct reading of the second line is kshanene vipramuchya as in
the Bombay text, and not kshemena vipramuchyeran. The latter reading
yields almost no sense. The Burdwan translator, who has committed grave
blunders throughout the Anusasana, adheres to the incorrect reading, and
makes nonsense of the verse.

364. In verse 3; vikrayartham is followed, as the Commentator rightly
explains, by niyunkta or some such word. Vikrayartham hinsyat may mean
'killing for sale.' This, however should be pleonastic with reference to
what follows.

365. Vratas (rendered as 'vows') and Niyamas (rendered as observances)
differs in this respect that the former involves positive acts of worship
along with the observance of, or abstention from, particular practices,
while the latter involves only such observance or abstention.

366. The orthodox belief is that all rituals are literally eternal. As
eternal, they existed before anybody declared them or set them down in
holy writ. The ritual in respect of gifts of kine sprang in this way,
i.e., in primeval time. It was only subsequently declared or set down in
holy writ.

367. In verse 5, if instead of the reading swah, swa be adopted, the
meaning would be knowing that he would have to die. A Rohini is a red
cow. The words Samanga and Vahula are Vedic terms applied to the cow. The
Sandh; in vahuleti is arsha. The formula or Mantras that should be
uttered in actually giving away the kine occur in the scriptures.

368. The Commentator explains that gavadinam in the first line refers to
gopratindhinam. The second line is very terse. The sense is that at only
the eight step in the homeward journey of the recipient, all the merits
attaching to vicarious gift become his who gives an actual cow: what
need, therefore, be said of that merit when the recipient reaches home
and draws from the cow the means of worshipping his domestic fire,
entertaining his guests, etc?

369. Ashtami is the eighth day of the lunar fortnight. There must be two
Ashtamis in every lunar month. A particular Ashtami is known as the Kamya
or the Goshtha. On that day, kine are worshipped with sandalpaste,
vermilion, floral wreaths, etc.

370. Sikhi means a bull, so called from the hump it carries. The
construction is sikhi Vrishaiva etc,

371. A Kapila cow is one that gives a copious measure of milk whenever
she is milked, and is possessed of various other accomplishments and
virtues.

372. For without ghee, which is produced from milk, there can be no
sacrifice. The sa may refer to Soma, but sacrifice is evidently meant.

373. The idea of uchcchishta, is peculiarly Hindu and cannot be rendered
into any other language. Everything that forms the remnant of meal after
one has left of eating, is uchcchishta. The calf sucks its dam. The
udders, however, are not washed before milking the dam, for the milk
coming out of them is not held to be impure remnant.

374. Swastayana is a ceremony of propitiation, productive of blessing and
destructive of misery of every kind.

375. The commentator explains that by a wet cowhide is meant a piece of
cowhide that has been dipped in water and thus purified. Upavisya is
understood after Charmani. The mention of bhumau implies the avoidance of
dishes or plates or cups of white brass or other allowable metals. Gavam
pushtim, I understand, means 'the prosperity in respect of kine.' i.e.,
the prosperity which kine confer.

376. The first line of verse 4 seems to be connected with verse 3. The
second line of 4 seems to stand by itself. By connecting the first line
of 4 with the second, the meaning will be--All mobile and immobile
creatures that will give us away etc. Immobile creatures making gifts of
kine would be utter nonsense.

377. Vallaki is the Indian lute. The Nupura is an ornament for the ankles.

378. Bhumidah is literally, a giver of land. King Saudasa, the
commentator explains, was known by the name of Bhumidah in consequence of
his liberality in the matter of giving away land unto the Brahmanas.

379. These are the several names by which kine are known. The first is
probably derived from kine bearing the plough and thus assisting the
tillage of the soil. The second implies beauty of form. The third is
derived from the cow being regarded as the origin of all things in the
universe: all things, therefore, are only so many forms of the cow.
Viswarupa implies the same thing. Matara implies mothers, kine being
regarded as the mothers of all.

380. Ghee is regarded so sacred because of its use in sacrifices. It is
with the aid of ghee that the deities have become what they are. Itself
sacred, it is also cleansing at the same time.

381. Sri is the goddess of Prosperity. The answer of Bhishma will explain
the question fully.

382. Devendreshu is evidently a misreading for Daitendreshu.

383. The commentator explains that hence, by making gifts of gold, one
comes to be regarded as making gifts of the entire universe.

384. i.e., into water, for water is identical with Agni.

385. This refers to the practice of making the sacrificial fire by
rubbing two sticks of Sami. It is a very inflammable wood and is used
hence in all sacred rites.

386. Hiranyaretas implies having gold for his vital seed.

387. Vasumati implies endued with wealth, so called because the seed of
Agni, identified with gold, is wealth of the highest kind and fell on the
Earth who from that time began to hold it.

388. Skanda is derived from Skanna or fallen out. Guha implies secret.
The secrecy of his birth in the wilderness led to the bestowal of this
name. He has many other names.

389. Jatarupa refers to the incident of its having assumed an excellent
form after its birth from Agni.

390. The commentator explains,--Pravrittipradhanam jangamamabhut.

391. Sa guna refers to Sattwa. Tejas is identical with Buddhi, because
Buddhi, like Light, discovers all things. Sattwa, again, being of the
nature of space, or rather being space itself, is of universal form; that
is, Sattwa is all-pervading.

392. Avasatmaka is explained by the commentator as bhranta.

393. These are different names of Brahman and Mahadeva.

394. The 'hence' here does not refer to what preceded immediately, but
has reference to what has been said of the identity of Agni with Brahman
and Rudra.

395. Pravartakam implies leading to Pravritti for righteous acts or
Chittasuddhi.

396. The commentator explains that the Pitris should be worshipped on the
day of the New moon, the deities should then be worshipped on the first
day of the lighted fortnight. Or, on any other day of the lighted
fortnight, the Pitri-sacrifice or Sraddha should be performed first; the
Deva-sacrifice or Ishti should then be performed.

397. Anwaharyam, the commentator explains, is paschatkartavyam, i.e.,
subsequently performable (subsequent, i.e., to the worship of the gods).
There is a special ordinance, however, which lays down that the Sraddha
should be performed on the afternoon of the day of the new moon. The gods
should be adored on the first day of the lighted fortnight. Hence, owing
to this especial ordinance, the Sraddha must precede the worship of the
gods, and not succeed it.

398. Masha, is the Phascolus Roxburghii.

399. It is difficult to understand what is meant by Vadhrinasa here. It
means either a large bull, or a kind of bird, or a variety of the goat.
Probably the bull is intended.

400. Pitrikshaye is mrita-tithau. Kalasaka is explained by Nilakantha as
identical with the common potherb called Shuka or the country sorrel
(Rumex visicarius, Linn). Some hold that it is something like the sorrel,
Lauham is the petals of the Kanchana flower (Bauhinia acuminata, Linn).

401. To this day the sanctity of Gaya is universally recognised by all
Hindus. Sraddhas are performed there under the banian called the Akshaya
or inexhaustible banian.

402. All religious acts are either nitya or kamya. The former imply acts
that are obligatory and by doing which no particular merit is acquired
but by not doing which sin is incurred. The latter imply those optional
acts which, if done, produce merit but which, if omitted, leads to no sin.

403. Literally, 'set in motion a body of kings,' i.e., become an
Overlord."

404. When Brahmanas are fed, they are made to sit in long lines. They
that are stained with vices are excluded from the line. Such exclusion
from the line is regarded as equal to complete outlawry.

405. i.e., who have undergone a natural circumcision

406. Implying soothsayers.

407. This is a common form of expression to imply the fruitlessness of an
act. Libations should be poured on the blazing fire. If poured on the
ashes, they lead to no merit, for only Agni in his blazing form can bear
them to the intended places.

408. The idea is that heaven is the result of one's deeds. It is attached
to the fruits of one's acts. The man falling off from heaven is identical
with heaven being dissociated from the fruits of his acts. Hence such a
falling off at the man or the dissociation of heaven is likened to a
bird's dissociation from its perch when the chain tying it to the perch
is broken. The simile seems to be far-fetched.

409. It is painful to see how very careless the Vernacular versions of
the Anusasana have been. From want of space the numerous errors that have
been committed have not been pointed out, At times, however, the errors
appear to be so grave that one cannot pass them by in silence. In the
second half of the first line, whether the reading be avapta as in the
Bengal texts or chavapta as in the Bombay texts, the meaning is that the
Avapta or one that has not sown na vijabhagam prapnuyat, i.e., would not
get a share of the produce. The Burdwan translators make a mess of it,
while K. P. Singha skips over it.

410. The sense is that the calumniator, his sire, and son meet with
destruction in consequence of such an act.

411. These purificatory rites, after the usual period of mourning,
consists in shaving and bathing and wearing new clothes.

412. The act, as explained by the commentator, consisted in the father's
doing that with reference to the son which, as the ordinance went, was
done by sons with reference to sires.

413. In one of the vernacular versions, the wrong reading Kshama is
adopted for Akshaya.

414. Ravana and other Rakshasas who spring from Pulastya's line are known
as Brahma-Rakshasas or Rakshasas of regenerate origin.

415. i.e., that fast which mortifies the body is not to be regarded as
equivalent to penance. True penance is something else. An observer of
such a fast is not to be regarded as an ascetic. Such fasts, again, are
sinful instead of being meritorious.

416. By Upavasa in the second line is meant abstention from food between
the two prescribed hours for eating, and not that fast which mortifies
the body. One may, again, eat the most luxurious food without being
attached to it. One also, by repining at one's abstinence, may come to be
regarded as actually enjoying the most luxurious food.

417. Meat of animals slaughtered in sacrifices is allowable. By taking
such meat, one does not become an eater of meat. In fact, one may etc.

418. Prashthauhi means a cow pregnant with her second calf. Grishti means
a cow that has brought forth only her first calf.

419. 'The commentator explains that the direction about ascertaining the
names of the Rishis and the meanings of those names proceed from the
kings' desire of cautioning the Rakshasi lest in going to destroy them
she might herself meet with destruction.

420. In other words, Vasishtha attributes the leanness or emaciation of
himself and his companions to the failure to discharge their daily rites
of religious practice.

421. Lotus-stalks are eaten in India and are mentioned by Charaka as
heavy food.

422. Sunahsakha implies a friend of dogs. The newcomer who had joined the
roving Rishis had a dog with him. Hence, he is called by the name of
Sunahsakha.

423. Brahma-danda literally means the stick in the hand of a Brahmana.
Figuratively, it implies the chastisement inflicted by a Brahmana in the
form of a curse. As such it is more effective than the thunderbolt in the
hands of Indra himself, for the thunderbolt blasts only those objects
that lie within its immediate range. The Brahmana's curse, however,
blasts even those that are unborn.

424. Libations should always be poured upon a blazing fire. Fire made
with dry grass or straw blaze up quickly and become soon extinguished. By
pouring libations, therefore, upon such fires, one practically pours them
upon ashes and gains no merit.

425. To derive the means of sustenance from a wife was always viewed with
feelings of aversion in this country. It seems, therefore, that the
custom of domesticating sons-in-law was not unknown in ancient times. To
receive acts of hospitality in return for those rendered was regarded as
not only meanness but also destructive of merit.

426. Jnatinam is an instance of the genitive in what is called Anadara.
The meaning, therefore, is disregarded them. For a Brahmana woman to
bring forth a son devoted to heroic deeds is a reproach.

427. The scriptures declare that Righteousness loses its strength as Time
advances. In the Krita age, it exists in entirety. In the Treta, it loses
a quarter. In the Dwapara, another quarter is lost. In the Kali age, full
three quarters are lost and only a quarter is all that remains.

428. The Rishis think that the distinctions between the lower, the
middling, and the higher classes of society are eternal, and nothing can
be a greater calamity than the effacement of those distinctions. Equality
of men, in their eyes, is an unmitigated evil.

429. Forgiveness is the duty of the Brahmana. To fall off from
forgiveness is to fall off from duty. To censure when censured and assail
the assailer, are grave transgressions in the case of a Brahmana. The
idea of retaliation should never enter the Brahmana's heart; for the
Brahmana is the friend of the universe. His behaviour to friend and foe
should be equal. To eat the flesh that attaches itself to the back-bone
of a slaughtered animal is also a grave transgression.

430. A religious mendicant should always wander over the Earth, sleeping
where night overtakes him. For such a man to reside in a city or town is
sinful.

431. To till the soil is a transgression for a Brahmana.

432. Good food should never be taken alone. It should always be shared
with children and servants.

433. A village having only one well should be abandoned by a Brahmana,
for he should not draw water from such a well which is used by all
classes of the population.

434. The penance that is involved in standing on one foot should be
practised, like all other penances, in the woods. To practise a penance
on the way leading to a village so that people may be induced to make
gifts, is a transgression of a grave kind.

435. Some kine that are vicious have their hind legs tied with a rope
while they are milked. If the rope be made of human hair, the pain felt
is supposed to be very great. To obtain the aid of a calf belonging to
another cow is regarded as sinful. To the cow also, the process of
sucking cannot be agreeable. If the milk is held in a vessel of white
brass, it becomes unfit for gods and guests.

436. The discourse is called eternal and immutable because of its subject
being so. Duties are eternal truths.

437. This discourse on duties delivered by the Rishis is called a Sastra.
Literally, anything that governs men, i.e., regulates their behaviour, is
called a Sastra. As such, the enumeration of duties occurring in this
Lesson, although it has been made by a reference to their breaches, is
therefore, a Sastra.

438. Literally, they who cook for dogs, i.e., keep dogs a, companions;
meaning members of the lowest caste.

439. The commentator takes Tapah or Penance as indicative of the duties
of the four orders of life, and Dharma as indicative of compassion and
other virtues.

440. Dhupas are incenses offered to the deities. Being of inflammable
substances, they are so made that they may burn slowly or smoulder
silently. They are the inseparable accompaniments of a worship of the
deities.

441. Tejas is explained by the commentator, as used here for Kanti or
beauty, and prakasam for kirti; there is no necessity, however, for
rejecting the ordinary meaning of Tejas which is energy.

442. The sense seems to be that if a man dies during that period when the
sun is in his southward course, he is dragged through a thick darkness.
For escaping that darkness, one should give lights at the period
mentioned.

443. What is meant by the juice of deciduous herbs is oil of mustard
seeds and castor seeds, etc.

444. Well-fried paddy, reduced to powder, is sometimes used for giving a
coating to dishes of meat.

445. It will be remembered that the only chastisement that was in vogue
in the Krita age was the crying of 'Fie' on an offender.

446. The Bombay text has vatsakah for utsavah. If the former reading he
adopted, it would mean those rites that are performed for the prosperity
and longevity of children. Of course, in such rites also the deities are
worshipped and propitiated.

447. For Dwijaya some text read Grahaya meaning guests.

448. 'Jwalante' has 'dwipah' for its nominative understood. A twinkle
occupies an instant of time. What is said here is that the giver of
lights becomes endued with beauty and strength for as many years as the
number of instants for which the lights given by him are seen to burn.

449. 'Kshatrabandhu' implies a low or vile Kshatriya.

450. Literally, 'Why dost thou dip such parts of thy body into a pond of
water?'

451. The study of the Vedas is regarded as equivalent in merit of gifts.
Hence actual gifts of articles are spoken of as 'gifts of other kinds.'

452. Literally 'friendship is seven-word.' Sometimes the same expression
is understood as meaning 'seven-paced,' The sense, of course, is that if
the righteous meet and exchange seven words (or, walk with each other for
only seven steps), they become friends.

453. The Bombay text has Somapithi and upavati instead of upayanti. The
Bengal text reads Somavithi which seems to be inaccurate. The sense seems
to be that of Somapithi or drinker of (sacrificial) soma.

454. The Ekaratra, Pancharatra, and Ekadasaratra, sacrifices consist of
fasts and gifts for the periods indicated by the names, viz., one night,
five nights, and eleven nights.

455. 'Golden moons' imply those well-carved and beautifully fringed discs
of gold that are worn by Hindu ladies on the forehead and that hang by
thin chains of gold attached to the, hair. In Bengal, ladies of
respectable houses wear a kind of ornament called 'Chandrahara' or the
moon-wreath. This ornament is worn round the waist, on the hip. Several
chains of gold, from half a dozen to a dozen, having a large disc of
well-carved gold to which they are attached, constitute this really very
beautiful ornament. The disc is divided into two halves, attached to each
other by hinges, so that in sitting down, the ornament produces no
inconvenience.

456. In the Santi Parva it has been explained that in ancient times kings
sometimes performed sacrifices causing altars to be raised at small
distances from one another. These distances were measured by hurling a
heavy piece of wood called Sami, so that throwing the Sami from one
altar, the next altar would be created upon the spot where it fell.

457. i.e. if a sinful man mends his conduct, he succeeds in warding off
the misery and evils to which he would otherwise be subject in
consequence of his sins.

458. What is said here is this; certain persons have the ugly habit of
picking up little clods of earth and pound them into dust, while sitting
on the ground and engaged in talking. The habit also of tearing the grass
while sitting on the ground may be marked. It should be remembered that
the people of India in ancient times used often to sit on the bare
ground. As to cutting off the nails with the teeth, it is an ugly habit
with many young men.

459. The Brahma Muhurta is that when the sun is just below the horizon.

460. The prayers said in the morning and the evening are also spoken of
as adoring the two twilights.

461. 'One should always observe the vow of Brahmacharya' means that one
should abstain from sexual congress except with one's wedded wives and in
the proper season.

462. The Bombay text reads the second line differently. What is meant, is
that the wounds inflicted by wordy shafts rankle and fester and lead to
death.

463. Samyava is a thin cake of unleavened bread, fried with ghee, pounded
and again made up into an oblong form with fresh bread, sugar and spices,
and again fried with ghee. Krisara is a kind of liquid food made of milk,
sesame, rice, sugar, and spices. Sashkuli is a kind of pie. Payasa is
rice boiled in sugar and milk.

464. Antarddhane implies 'in darkness'; hence one should always examine
the bed with a light before one lies down on it.

465. Pranan, the commentator explains, implies the upper holes of the
body, such as the nostrils, the ear-holes and, the eyes.

466. The Brahmana is more powerful than the other two, for while the
other two cannot injure except when they have, their foe within sight,
the Brahmana can do so even by not seeing his enemy.

467. The custom in India, with especially all orthodox Brahmanas, is to
wear a single flower on the head, inserted into the coronal lock. This
flower may be a red one, it is said, after the prohibition in the
previous verse about the wearing of garlands made of red flowers.

468. What is stated here is that dry perfumes should not be used, but
those which are pounded with water and made into a paste.

469. The cloth worn by a Hindu has two lateral fringes which contain a
lesser number of threads than the body of the cloth.

470. It has been said that Hinduism is a vast system of personal hygiene.
These directions about change of attire are scrupulously observed by
every rigid Hindu to this day. No change seems to have taken place in the
daily habits of the people.

471. Priyangu is the Aglaia Roxburghiana. Vilwa is the Egle marmelos.
Tagara is the Taberuaemontana coronaria, Linn. Kesara is probably the
Eclipta alba, Hassk.

472. Na is the nom, sing. of Nri, implying man.

473. One of the Vernacular translations takes valena as signifying child
and para-sraddha as meaning the first or adya sraddha.

474. This noise refers to that of chewing or sucking or licking, etc. It
is an ugly habit with some people.

475. Doubting, for example, as to whether he would be able to digest it
or not, or whether what he is taking is clean or not, or whether it would
be too much for him.

476. In offering certain articles at the Sraddha, the articles are first
placed on this part of the right hand and then offered with due Mantras
to the Pitris.

477. The achamana is not exactly washing, when one is directed to perform
the achamana after having eaten, there it, of course, implies an act of
washing. At the commencement, however, of religious acts, the rite of
achamana consists in merely touching the lips and some other parts with
water.

478. The Brahmana's aid is necessary in selecting the ground, and
settling the longitudinal and other directions of the house, as also in
fixing the day of commencing the work of building.

479. I adopt the meaning which Nilakantha points out. According to him,
this verse forbids the killing of birds at night time and their killing
after having fed and adopted them. Indeed, one may buy such birds killed
by others for food. The word Dwija, however, may mean both hair and
nails. The first part of the line, therefore, may be taken as a
prohibition against the cutting of hair and nails after eating. The words
na samarcha reta, in that case, would be difficult to interpret.
Probably, it is this that has led the commentator to take Dwija here for
a bird. Some texts read panam for na cha.

480. Pravaras indicate the race in which one is born. They are named from
the names of the Vedic Rishis.

481. The commentator explains that ayonim implies of unknown birth and
viyonim of mean birth.

482. Brahmanih here refers to the rituals in the Vedas and not persons of
the first order.

483. The fact is, one is directed to bathe after a shave. One is
considered impure after a shave until one bathes.

484. Uddesa means, as the commentator explains, in brief.

485. The word rendered conduct in the concluding verse of this lesson is
acharah. It implies not only one's behaviour to one's own self and
others, i.e., to beings inferior, equal, and superior. The word acharah,
therefore, includes the entire body of acts that one does in this life,
including the very sentiments that one cherishes.

486. The flower of the cane cannot be plucked for being offered to the
deities.

487. An Acharya is an ordinary instructor. He is called an Upadhyaya who
teaches the Vedas. The Upadhyaya is greater than even ten Acharyas or
ordinary teachers. The father, again, deserves ten times as much respect
as is paid to the Upadhyaya. As regards the mother, again, the reverence
due to her is greater than what is due to the father. The mother is equal
to the whole earth.

488. Many of the verses of this Lesson are from Manu. The relative
positions of the Acharya, the Upadhyaya, the father, and the mother, as
given in verse 15, is not consistent with Manu. verse 15 would show that
the Upadhyaya was regarded as very much superior of the Acharya. In Manu,
II--140-41, he is called an Acharya who taught all the Vedas, without any
remuneration. He, on the other hand, who taught a particular Veda for a
living, was called an Upadhyaya. The first line of verse 19 corresponds
with Manu, II--148. The sense is that that birth which one derives from
one's parents is subject to death; while the birth derived from the
preceptor is true regeneration, unfading and immortal. It is a question
whether any other nation paid such respect to persons employed in
teaching.

489. Kanchi is an ornament worn by ladies round the waist or hips. There
is a shining disc of gold or silver, which dangles on the hip. It is
commonly called Chandra-hara. The Nupura is an anklet of silver, with
moving bullets placed within, so that when the wearer moves, these make
an agreeable sound.

490. In verse 3, Avaguna means Nirguna; Ekatma means alone and asamhta
implies without associates i.e., helpless.

491. A Padma is a very large number. Instead of rendering such words
exactly, have, in some of the preceding verses, following the sense, put
down 'millions upon millions of years.'

492. Avartanani means years. Four and twelve make sixteen, Sara is arrow.
The arrows are five in number as possessed by Kama, the deity of love.
The number of fires also is seven. The compound saragniparimana,
therefore, implies five and thirty. Adding this to sixteen, the total
comes up to one and fifty.

493. A countless number almost.

494. Here the exact number of years is not stated.

495. Some of the most beautiful ladies in Indian mythology and history
have been of dark complexion. Draupadi, the queen of the Pandavas, was
dark in colour and was called Krishna. As to women called Syamas, the
description given is that their bodies are warm in winter and cold in
summer, and their complexion is like that of heated gold.

496. A very large figure is given.

497. This sacrifice consisted of the slaughter of a human being.

498. The exact number of years is given, consisting of a fabulous figure.

499. Abhravakasasila is explained by Nilakantha as having the attribute
of the Avakasa or place of Abhra or the clouds. Hence, as stainless as
the ether, which, of course, is the purest of all the elements.

500. Sacrifices have for their soul either the actual rites laid down in
the scriptures or fasts of several kinds. The observance of fasts is
equal to the performance of sacrifices, for the merits of both are equal.

501. The word Tirtha as already explained (in the Santi Parva) means a
sacred water. There can be no Tirtha without water, be it a river, a
lake, or even a well. Bhishma, however, chooses to take the word in a
different sense.

502. The language is figurative. By Manasa is not meant the
trans-Himalayan lake of that name, which to this day is regarded as
highly sacred and draws numerous pilgrims from all parts of India. The
word is used to signify the Soul. It is fathomless in consequence of
nobody being able to discover its origin. It is pure and stainless by
nature. It is represented here as having Truth for its waters and the
Understanding for its lake. Probably, what is meant by this is that the
Understanding, containing the waters of Truth, forms a part of this
Tirtha as the lakes of Pushkara form a part of the Tirtha called by that
name.

503. Once freed from the idea of meum implies him who identifies himself
with all creatures; him, that is, in whom the idea of self has been
extinguished.

504. Such a man, through the merit he acquires, causes his deceased
ancestors and descendants to be freed from every kind of misery in the
next world.

505. In the Naramedha, a human being was offered up as the sacrifice.

506. The sense seems to be this: One that is not possessed of much
learning is liable to do improper acts. These acts are all done for
another, viz., one's body and the senses and not oneself. The para here
is, the Not-self.

507. Nichayam is, as explained by the commentator Avasthitim.

508. The sense is that when these leave the body, they are accompanied by
Righteousness.

509. Intermediate. i.e., between deities and human beings; hence, animals
and birds.

510. Brahma-Rakshasa is a Rakshasa that belongs, like Ravana and others,
by birth to the regenerate order.

511. Masha is Phaseolus Roxburghii, Kulatta is Dolichos biflosus, Roxb.
Kalaya is Pisum Sativum, Linn. Mudga is Phaseolus Mango, Linn. Atasi is
Linum usitattisimam, Linn.

512. A Kanka is a bird of prey.

513. He is repeatedly struck with the clubs and hammers and mallets. He
is frequently impaled. He is confined with fiery vessels. He is dragged
with forests of sword-blades. He is made to walk over heated sand. He is
rubbed against thorny Salmalis. The Salmali is the Bombox Malabaricum.

514. The commentator explains that Nishpava means Rajamasha which is a
kind of bears. It is the Dolichas catjung. Halagolaka is a long-tailed
worm.

515. A Krikara is a kind of partridge. It is spelt also as Krikala or
Krikana. A Vartaka is a sort of quail.

516. Tailapayin is, literally, one that drinks oil. That name is applied
to a cockroach.

517. Vyathitah and vyadhitah are the correct readings.

518. That day is sterile or lost in which no gift is made of food.

519. Kama and krodha are mentioned: but the use of cha gives by
implication cupidity. What is meant by nidhaya sarvabhuteshu is, dividing
them into infinite small parts, to cast them off from oneself to others.
It is painful to see how the Burdwan translators misunderstand verses 2
and 3. They read Hanti for Hanta and write ridiculous nonsense.

520. In the first line, after Sarvabhutani, atmatwena is understood. The
sense of this verse seems to be this; such a man leaves no trace behind
him, for he becomes identified with Brahma, He is, therefore, said to be
apada. The deities on the other hand, are padaishinah, for they desire a
fixed abode such as heaven or a spot fraught with felicity.

521. The sense is that when one refuses a solicitation one should think
how one would feel if another were to refuse the solicitations one
addressed to that other. So with regard to the rest.

522. By committing a slaughter, one becomes guilty of it. By inciting
others to it one becomes guilty. By mentally committing an act of
slaughter, one becomes guilty of it.

523. i.e. by eating meat, one feels the desire for meat increasing. A
taste or predilection for meat is thus created. Hence, the best course is
total abstinence.

524. The sense is this: he who observes the vow of abstention from injury
comes to be regarded as the giver of life-breaths in this world. The
assurance given to all creatures of never injuring them on any occasion
is the Dakshina or Sacrificial present of the great sacrifice that is
constituted by universal compassion or abstention from injury.

525. Mansa is flesh. This verse explains the etymology of the word, Mam
(me) sa; Me he eateth, therefore, I shall eat him. The words following Me
he should be supplied in order to get at the meaning.

526. The sense is this; one, while endued with a human body injures
another, the consequences of that injury the doer will suffer in his
human body. One becomes a tiger and slays a deer. The consequences of
that act one will have to endure while one becomes reborn as a tiger.

527. What the sage says is that the fact of the worm's being able to
recollect the incidents of his past life is due to some meritorious act.
That meritorious act is the very sight of the sage which the worm has
been fortunate to obtain.

528. The sense is that among human beings also, acts are done with the
intention of securing happiness. In other words, human beings also enjoy
the fruits of their good acts and endure those of their evil ones.

529. Literally, the verse runs,--what is that which would forsake a
creature that is destitute of etc.,' meaning that such a creature has
been already forsaken by everything. Hence, 'the worm that is destitute
of speech, etc.' is destitute of everything. Its condition is really
fraught with great misery.

530. Jugupsita smritih jata is the paraphrase.

531. Swairini-kule implies, as the commentator explains, the race of
Munis. Swam (Dharamaya) irayati is the etymology. Ajnata-charitam-dharan
applied to Krishna-Dwaipayana. If it be read charam it would refer to
Maitreya.

532. Prithagatman implies one whose soul is still invested with upadhis;
Sukhatman is one whose soul has transcended all upadhis.

533. This literal version of the verse yields no sense. The meaning,
however, is this: Atichccheda or Atichcchanda implies a hyperbolic
statement, Ativaua means a paradox. It is said that by gift of even a
palmful of water one may attain to a place which is attainable by a
hundred sacrifices. This ordinance, which looks like a hyperbole, and its
statement by Vedic teachers that looks like a paradox, fill me with
wonder. The Vedas say that no one attains to such a place without a
hundred sacrifices. This seems to be untrue, for people do reach it by
making even slight gifts to deserving persons at proper times.

534. The sense is that those who pursue carnal pleasures meet with misery
as the end, and those who practise austerities meet with felicity as
their reward.

535. To obtain a sight of thee is the reward or result of my own acts. A
sight of thy person leads to prosperity, through the kindness thou
cherishest for us.

536. The sense is that an ascetic observant of penances, in whatever
stage, and a man possessed of omniscience, are regarded as equal.

537. Such an object can never be accomplished. Hence thy paleness and
leanness.

538. Though completely innocent, thou hast yet been cursed. The anxiety
due to this has made thee so.

539. Yamena praptam is the sense, as explained by the commentator.

540. The sense is this; one should not accept gifts made by a butcher or
slayer of animals. Ten butchers are equal to a single oilman. By
accepting a gift from an oilman, therefore, one incurs ten times as much
sin as by accepting a gift from a butcher. In this way, the measure of
sin goes on increasing according to the ratio given. A Nripa, as
explained by the commentator, means here a small chief. A small king is
equal to ten thousand butchers. A great king, however, is equal to half
of that, i.e., five thousand butchers, In other words, by accepting a
gift from a great king, a man incurs as much sin as is a full five
thousand times of the sin which is incurred by accepting a gift from a
butcher.

541. The reason is the declarations in the scriptures to that effect.

542. The sense, as explained by the commentator, is this: the Brahmana
who becomes the Ritwik and eats at a Sraddha becomes a Pitri of the
person performing the Sraddha. Hence, when his identity has been changed,
he should, on that day, abstain from sexual congress with even his own
spouse. By indulging in such congress, he incurs the sin of adultery.

543. Batakashaya is explained by the commentator as substance that is
named by pounding the hanging roots of the banian. The Priyangu here
mentioned is not the Aglaia Roxburghiana but the seed called
Rajasarshapa, i.e., Brassica juncea; Sinapis ramasa, Roxb. The Shashtika
paddy is that which ripens in sixty days.

544. The sense seems to be that the libations, few and far between, of
men who do not daily worship their fire are not borne by the fire to the
destined places.

545. Kshirapah means those that depend on the lacteal sustenance, hence,
little children.

546. Aurddhsadehikam danam means gifts made in course of Sraddhas and
other rites that are observed for improving the position of a deceased
person.

547. What is meant by the gift of lamps is the lighting of lamps in the
sky. These are placed on long poles which are fastened to the tallest
trees.

548. The commentator explains that when evening comes, one should
respectfully salute one's own feet. This custom has certainly died out in
Bengal. A whirl is certainly observable on cowdung when it first drops
from the cow; but the practice of making offering to it has also died out.

549. The second line seems to be unintelligible The reading I take is
Sraddheshu and not Schidreshu.

550. Vows and fasts, &c., should be observed after the Sankalpa or
Resolution to that effect has been formally enunciated. Even a plunge in
a piece of sacred water cannel be productive of merit unless the Sankalpa
has been formally enunciated. The Sankalpa is the enunciation of the
purpose for which the act is performed as also of the act that is
intended to be performed.

551. Vrishalipati literally means the husband of a Sudra woman. By
actually marrying a woman of the lowest order, by marrying before the
elder brother, by marrying a girl that has attained to puberty, and by
certain other acts, a Brahmana comes to be regarded as a Vrishalipati.

552. Kutapa is the hour about noontide. The shade of the elephant's body
implies a particular instant of time that is regarded as very favourable
for the Sraddha. The man that performs such a Sraddha is regarded as
acquiring the merits attaching to Sraddhas regularly performed for
thirteen years.

553. In India the tooth-brush consists of a twig or a little branch. One
end of it is chewed and softened. The softened fibres serve the purpose
of a brush. Such a brush is used only once. It is thrown away after the
brushing of the teeth is over.

554. It is difficult to identify what plants are meant by Karanjaka and
Suvarachala.

555. Bhanda includes utensils of copper and brass such as plates and cups
and jars and jugs. Broken utensils, to this day, are regarded
inauspicious. They are rejected, as a rule, by every family. Kali (Evil?)
has his abode in them, meaning that such utensils cause quarrels and
disputes. Broken bed-steads also are regarded as capable of causing loss
of wealth. Cocks and dogs should never be kept or reared in a house. The
roots of trees afford shelter to scorpions and snakes and venomous
insects and worms. One should not, therefore, plant trees or allow them
to grow up within one's abode.

556. A Brahmana's fire should never be ignited by a Sudra. Women also
should never be allowed to assist at Sraddhas for arranging the offerings.

557. Pramathas are the ghostly companions of Mahadeva. Literally, the
name implies smiters.

558. Anujnatah literally implies permitted. These creatures, i.e., the
kine, were permitted by me, means, perhaps, that they became my
favourites. Brahman, it is said, solicited Maheswara to accept some kine
in gift. The latter did accept some, and adopt from that time the device
of the bull on his flag.

559. Sambhrama here means, probably, joy, or that gratification which
shows itself in horripilation. It may also mean alacrity.

560. Upavasa here, as explained by the commentator, is used for
Indriyajaya or subjugation of the senses.

561. He who takes his meals at the proper hours is said to observe fasts.
He who avoids sexual congress with other women and associates with only
his wedded spouse and that at her season, is said to observe Brahmacharya.

562. To sell the Vedas or any kind of knowledge is a great sin.

563. The correct reading of the latter half of the first line is nabaram
natirogratah. The commentator explains, this means that 'there is nothing
inferior to it or beside it or before it.' In the first part of the first
line it has been said that there is nothing superior to it. The sense is
that it includes all, being as comprehensive as Brahman.

564. Samprakshalas are those Rishis who wash all their utensils daily so
that nothing is stored for them for the next day. Asmakuttas are those
that use only two pieces of stone for husking their grain. Dantolukhalas
are those that use their teeth for purposes of husking the grain they eat.

565. Swasarirapa-jivishu implies persons that do not stand in need of the
services of others for the support of their bodies.

566. The great forests are called Virasthana for cowards cannot enter or
reside in them.

567. Marum samsadhya implies abstention from even air and water as food
or means of subsistence.

568. It should be noted that the word Vira in the various compounds in
which, it occurs here, does not mean heroes of war. On the other hand, it
signifies heroes of righteousness and penances. The path of heroes is the
forest, for cowards cannot go there. The attitude of heroes (Virasana) is
a kind of attitude for Yogins to sit in.

569. Nisargat is literally through creation or original nature, or birth.
Of course, what is implied is that one becomes a Brahmana, or Kshatriya,
or Vaisya or Sudra, through original creation as such, by the Self-born,
that is, birth.

570. Ugra means a fierce or cruel person. It is also applied to signify a
person of a mixed caste whose occupation is the slaughter of animals in
the chase. The commentator is silent. I think, the food supplied by a
fierce or cruel person is meant here, What is said in this verse is that
the several kinds of food spoken of here should be renounced by a good
Brahmana.

571. The sense is this: if a Brahmana dies with any portion of the food
of a Sudra, a Vaisya, or a Kshatriya in his stomach, in his next life he
has to take birth as a Sudra, a Vaisya, or a Kshatriya. If, again, during
life he subsists upon food supplied to him by a Sudra, a Vaisya, or a
Kshatriya, he has to take birth in his next life as a Sudra, a Vaisya, or
a Kshatriya.

572. Kundasin means a pander. It may also imply one who eats from off the
vessel in which the food eaten has been cooked without, that is, using
plates or leaves.

573. The sense seems to be this: a Vaisya ultimately becomes a Brahmans
by observing the duties indicated in verses 30 to 33. As the immediate
reward, however, of his observance of these duties, he becomes a great
Kshatriya. What he should next do in order to become a Brahmana is said
in the verses that follow.

574. This may, besides, imply the taking of a sixth portion of the merits
acquired by his subjects through the righteous deeds they perform.

575. In India an inferior should always stand aside for letting his
superior pass. The Kshatriya should give way to the Brahmana, the Vaisya
to the Kshatriya, and the Sudra to the Vaisya.

576. i.e. Soul (including the Supreme Soul) and Not-soul.

577. Gauri is another name for Earth.

578. The Nadies or Rivers are feminine. Of course, among Rivers there are
some that are masculine, notably, the Sindhu or Indus. Tirthas are places
with sacred waters.

579. One who is free from vanity or arrogance deserves to be called
Purusha. The absence of vanity is implied by soliciting the help of
others even when one is competent oneself. Females follow females, such
being their nature. It is a compliment that Parvati pays to Siva for
Siva's questioning her when he himself is well-acquainted with the topic
upon which she is asked to discourse.

580. The word Sindhu in this verse does not imply the river Indus, but
stands for a river in general. Grammatically, it qualifies Devika before
it. Devika is another name of Sarayu.

581. According to the Hindu scriptures, marriage is not a contract. It is
the union of two individuals of opposite sexes into one person for better
performance of all deeds of piety.

582. Trivikrama is one who covered the three worlds with three steps of
his. It implies Vishnu who assumed the form of a dwarf for beguiling the
Asura king Vali.

583. The sense seems to be this: Thou knowest all things, all mysteries,
yet Thou canst bear all this knowledge within Thyself. We, however, are
so light-minded, i.e., destitute of gravity, that we are unable to bear
within ourselves the knowledge of a mystery. As soon as we got that
knowledge from Mahadeva, we felt the desire of letting it out; and,
indeed, we have let it out at thy request, and let out unto whom?--unto
one that must be secretly laughing at us for our seeming pride.

584. It is said that no person wishes to be vanquished by another in
respect of anything. The only one whose victory or superiority, however,
is bearable or, rather, prayed for, is the son. Hence, the Rishis wish
unto Krishna a son even superior to him.

585. The ward Pushti literally signifies growth or advancement. Hence, it
stands generally for excellence of greatness.

586. The correct reading is not pratisrayam but pratisravam which means
promise or pledge.

587. The pledge, probably, refers to the oaths taken by Bhima and others
about the slaughter of the Kauravas.

588. The sense is this: the king acquires great merit by wielding the rod
of chastisement properly, i.e., by punishing those that deserve
punishment. The infliction of punishment is what keeps the subjects
within the restraints of duty. The rod of chastisement, therefore, is the
very embodiment of the righteousness or merit of the king.

589. Vasudeva is Narayana, and Arjuna is Nara. Nara and Narayana had
practised severe penances at Vadari on the breast of the Himavat for many
thousand years. Vyasa afterwards adopted Vadari as his retreat.

590. The Hindu sages never attempt to speculate on the original creation
of the universe. Their speculations, however, are concerned with what is
called Avantara srishti or that creation which springs forth with the
awakening of Brahman. Creation and Destruction have occurred ceaselessly
and will occur ceaselessly. The original creation is impossible to
conceive as Eternity cannot have a beginning.

591. Putatman means, of cleansed Soul. This implies that though He is the
Lord or ruler of all existent objects, yet He is dissociated from them
The Refuge of the Emancipated--Comp. Gita, 'Mamupetya tu Kaunteya
punarjanma na vidyate,' etc., Purusha is He that lies in a pura or the
nine-doored mansion, i.e., the body. Sakshi or Witness implies that He
sees all things directly, without any medium obstructing His vision.
Kshetrajna implies the Chit lying within the body and who knows the body;
however, being inert, is not cognisant of the Chit it holds.

592. He is called Yoga because of the mind resting upon Him while it is
in Yoga abstraction. Pradhana, in Sankhya philosophy, is another name of
Prakriti or original Nature. All things have sprung from the union of
Prakriti and Purusha. Vasudeva, however, transcends Prakriti and Purusha
and is their Lord. Narasinghavapu--He assumed the human form with a
lion's head for slaying the Asura Hiranyakasipu, the father of Prahlada.

593. Sarva implies the source of all existent and non-existent things and
that in which all existent and non-existent things become merged at the
universal dissolution. Sambhava signifies Him who takes birth at His own
will. Acts cannot touch him. The birth of all other beings is determined
by their acts in previous lives. Com. Gita, Paritranaya sadhunam etc.
sambhavami yuge yuge. Bhuvana means one who attaches to acts their
respective fruits i.e., he in consequence of whom the weal and woe of all
creatures flow as due to acts.

594. Sambhu implies one whose birth has not been determined by extraneous
circumstances, or other influences than his own wish, the birth of all
other creatures being determined by forces extraneous to themselves.
Aditya may also mean the foremost one among the deities especially called
the Adityas. They are twelve in number. Dhatri may also imply one who
upholds everything in the universe by multiplying Himself infinitely.
Dhaturuttama may, besides, signify one who as Chit is superior to all
elements like Earth, Water, etc., which constitute all that is not-Chit.

595. Aprameya is, literally, immeasurable. Sankara thus explains it: He
has no such attributes as sound, etc; in consequence of this He is not an
object of direct perception by the sense; nor can He be an object of
inference, in consequence of there being nothing to which belong the same
attributes as His, etc. His inconceivability is the foundation of His
immeasurableness. Hrishikesa is regarded by European scholars as a
doubtful word. The Hindu commentators do not regard it so. It implies the
lord of the senses i.e., One who has his sense under complete control.
Or, it may mean One who sways the sense of others, i.e., causes them to
exercise their functions. Sankara proposes another meaning, viz. He that
is the form of the Sun or the Moon and as such, the rays of light
emanating from those luminaries and gladdening all creatures, are the
hairs on His head. Manu is another name for Mantra or sacred words having
great efficacy.

596. Krishna is one of the foremost names of the supreme God-head. It
means One who is always in transports of joy. It is derived from krish
which implies to be, and na meaning final Emancipation or cessation of
existence; the compound probably means One in whom every attribute has
been extinguished; hence, absence of change, of sorrow, of gift, etc.,
or, eternal and highest joy. Lohitaksha is Red-eyed, from His eyes being
of the hue of polished copper. Pratardana, according to Sankara, means
the killer of all creatures. Others take it as implying one who destroys
the cheerlessness of his worshippers. Prabhuta is One who is Great or
Vast in consequence of Knowledge, Puissance, Energy, and Renunciation,
etc.; Pavitram, Mangalam, Param should be taken as one name, although
each of them has a separate meaning.

597. Pranada is interpreted variously. It may mean He that causes the
life-breaths to operate; He that, as Time suspends the life-breaths
(i.e., kills all creatures); He that connects the life-breaths (i.e., set
them a-going when threatened with extinction; hence, healer of diseases).
Prana implies He who is the cause of the life of every living creature
being Himself, as it were, the life-breath that inspires them.
Hiranyagarbha signifies He that is identical with the Grandsire.
Bhugarbha is one who has the Earth for his abdomen, implying that all
things on Earth are in His abdomen.

598. Atmavan, other Beings are said to be Sariravan, Indriyavan, etc., in
consequence of the possession of such attributes as Sarira, Indriya, etc.
But the Supreme God-head is nothing but soul. He rests on his own true
nature or essence without requiring anything extraneous like the deities
or human beings whereon to live or exist,

599. Aha is the day; He is so called because of Jiva being, as it were,
awakened when he goes to Him. As long as Jiva is at a distance from Him,
he is steeped in the sleep of Avidya or Nescience (a happy word which
Professor Max Muller has coined) Samvatsara or the year He is so called
because Time is His essence. Vyala--He is a huge and fierce snake that
inspires dread.

600. Vrishakapi is otherwise explained by Valadeva Vidyabhushan, as He
that showers blessings upon His worshippers and causes all His foes to
tremble with fear.

601. Vishnu is supposed to be within the constellation called Sisumara or
the Northern Bear. The stars, without changing their places per se, seem
to revolve round this point within the constellation named.

602. In India, no man should worship the deities, with a full stomach.
Indeed, one must abstain from every kind of food and drink if one has to
worship the deities formally.

603. Rama of Bhrigu's race went to Mahadeva for acquiring the science of
arms. While dwelling in Siva's retreat, he had a quarrel with Karttikeya
or Kumara, the son of Siva's loins. Rama worsted his preceptor's son in
battle, at which his preceptor, gratified with him, made him a present of
his own battle-axe, wherewith the regenerate here exterminated the
Kshatriyas for full one and twenty times.

604. Many of these words beginning with Mahat represent Krishna's own
words as spoken to Arjuna in the Gita. 'I am the foremost of sacrifices;
I am the foremost of sacrificers,' etc.

605. Referring to Hanumat and others among the apes that Rama led against
Ravana.

606. The universe consists of Soul and Not-soul. Jiva, when cased in
matter or Not-soul takes Not-soul for himself, in his ignorance. In fact
until true knowledge is attained, the body is taken for self.

607. The sense is that untimely deaths do not occur in such places; nor
fear of oppression or unlawful chastisement by the king; etc.

608. The Bengal reading mrishtascha varina is incorrect. The Bombay
reading mrishtasya varinsha is correct.

609. The word--kavi used in this verse, means Agni or fire, as explained
by the commentator, One of the vernacular translators wrongly takes it as
implying the preceptor Sukara.

610. The last verse, as read in the Bengal texts, is vicious. Nastyandam
astitu Brahma, etc., is the correct reading.

611. To an afflicted person the day seems long.

612. The sense is that it is this Kesava who upholds the cause of
Righteousness when dangers overtake it. cf. 'Yada yada hi dharmasya,
etc.' in the Gita. It does not mean that when doubts are entertained by
persons on questions of morality, it is Kesava who dispels them.

613. Refers to the existence of Brahma when all else is nought.

614. The fivefold seed consists of the four orders of creatures and acts
which determine the conditions of all beings.

615. Eagle marmelos, Linn.

616. Durvasa is regarded as a portion of Mahadeva. The question of
Yudhishthira, therefore, really relates to Mahadeva although the name
that occurs is of Durvasa.

617. A Parvam is a knot. Reeds and bamboos consist of a series of knots.
The space between two knots is called a Salya.

618. The allusion is to the fiery mare's head which is supposed to wander
through the ocean.

619. Verses 4 to 9 are extremely difficult. They represent so many
surceases. Nilakantha, however, has shown great ingenuity in expounding
them. In the first line of 4, drishtam refers to pratyaksham, and srutam
to sruti or agama. Hence, what is meant by the first line
is,--Innumerable are the cases of both direct perception and scriptural
assertion in which the scriptures are regarded as more authoritative, and
those is which direct perception is regarded as more authoritative. In 5,
the speaker refers to the atomic and other theories of the creation
derived from Reason. Bhishma declares it as his opinion that all such
theories are untenable or groundless. In the first line of 6, the word
Ekam implies Brahma. The sense is, if thou thinkest that Brahma alone is
the cause of the universe and in thinking so becomest landed on doubt.
The reply to this is that Yoga for a long course of years will enable
thee to comprehend the sufficiency of unassisted Brahma to evolve the
universe. In 7, anekam pranayatram kalpamanena refers to one who without
leading any particular or settled mode of life lives just as it suits him
to live, that is, who leads the life of a religious mendicant never
thinking of the morrow. In 9, anihaddham vacha implies what is not
defined or indicated by the words of the Vedas or scriptures. The Burdwan
Pundits have made a mess of the whole passage, or, rather, of nearly the
whole of this section.

620. Teshu is equivalent to praryakshanumanachareshu. The sense,
therefore, is that the three, viz., direct perception, inference, and
good conduct being, for these reasons, fallible, the only infallible
standard that remain, is audition or the scriptures, or, as verse 14 puts
it, men with understandings born of the scriptures.

621. Atripyantah are men who like Yudhishthira are filled with anxiety:
as to what they should do. Seekers after the right are so called.

622. The five who must be first fed are the deities, the Pitris, the
guests, diverse creatures included under the word Bhutus, and lastly
relatives.

623. Some texts read nabhibhavet, meaning one should never vanquish an
old man (i.e., assert one's superiority over him).

624. In his excellent work on the Curiosities of Literature Mr. D'Israeli
attempts to trace the origin of the custom of uttering a blessing on
people who sneeze. The custom seems, however, to be very ancient and
widespread. It exists to this day in India, among the Hindus at any rate,
as it existed in the days of the Mahabharata.

625. It seems that the author is of opinion that one lightens one's sins
by admissions before the wise. To conceal a sin after having committed it
proves the confirmed sinner.

626. 'Covered by righteousness' implies 'if, having once tripped, the
sinner restrains himself and engages to do acts of righteousness.'

627. What is stated here is this; the condition of all living creatures
is determined by their acts of this and past lives.. Nature, again, is
the cause of acts. What of felicity and misery, therefore, one sees in
this world, must be ascribed to these two causes. As regards the self
also, O Yudhishthira, thou art not freed from that universal law. Do
thou, therefore, cease to cherish doubts of any kind. If thou seest a
learned man that is poor, or an ignorant man that is wealthy, if thou
seest exertion failing and the absence of exertion leading to success.
thou must always ascribe the result to acts and Nature.

628. What is stated here is this; one may become righteous by
accomplishing oneself righteous deeds or inducing or helping others to do
them. Similarly, one becomes unrighteous by doing oneself acts that are
evil or by inducing or helping others to do them.

629. Righteousness leads to regions of felicity. The former is said to be
eternal. While the latter are not so. The question asked (or doubt
raised) is why is the effect not eternal when the cause is eternal? It is
explained below.

630. There are two kinds of Righteousness, viz., nishkama and sakama. The
former leads to attainment of Brahma, the latter to heaven and felicity.
Brahma is eternal; the latter not so. Nishkama Righteousness being
eternal, leads to an eternal reward. Sakama Righteousness not being so,
does not lead to an eternal reward. The word Kala here means Sankalpa,
hence Dhruvahkalah means nishkama Dharma.

631. Here, Calah means 'Sankalpa'
